[ Sense and Sensibility by Jane Austen 1811 ] CHAPTER 1 The family of Dashwood had long been settled in Sussex .
Their estate was large , and their residence was at Norland Park , in the centre of their property , where , for many generations , they had lived in so respectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of their surrounding acquaintance .
The late owner of this estate was a single man , who lived to a very advanced age , and who for many years of his life , had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister .
But her death , which happened ten years before his own , produced a great alteration in his home ; for to supply her loss , he invited and received into his house the family of his nephew Mr .
Henry Dashwood , the legal inheritor of the Norland estate , and the person to whom he intended to bequeath it .
In the society of his nephew and niece , and their children , the old Gentleman 's days were comfortably spent .
His attachment to them all increased .
The constant attention of Mr .
and Mrs .
Henry Dashwood to his wishes , which proceeded not merely from interest , but from goodness of heart , gave him every degree of solid comfort which his age could receive ; and the cheerfulness of the children added a relish to his existence .
By a former marriage , Mr .
Henry Dashwood had one son : by his present lady , three daughters .
The son , a steady respectable young man , was amply provided for by the fortune of his mother , which had been large , and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age .
By his own marriage , likewise , which happened soon afterwards , he added to his wealth .
To him therefore the succession to the Norland estate was not so really important as to his sisters ; for their fortune , independent of what might arise to them from their father 's inheriting that property , could be but small .
Their mother had nothing , and their father only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal ; for the remaining moiety of his first wife 's fortune was also secured to her child , and he had only a life-interest in it .
The old gentleman died : his will was read , and like almost every other will , gave as much disappointment as pleasure .
He was neither so unjust , nor so ungrateful , as to leave his estate from his nephew ; -- but he left it to him on such terms as destroyed half the value of the bequest .
Mr .
Dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of his wife and daughters than for himself or his son ; -- but to his son , and his son 's son , a child of four years old , it was secured , in such a way , as to leave to himself no power of providing for those who were most dear to him , and who most needed a provision by any charge on the estate , or by any sale of its valuable woods .
The whole was tied up for the benefit of this child , who , in occasional visits with his father and mother at Norland , had so far gained on the affections of his uncle , by such attractions as are by no means unusual in children of two or three years old ; an imperfect articulation , an earnest desire of having his own way , many cunning tricks , and a great deal of noise , as to outweigh all the value of all the attention which , for years , he had received from his niece and her daughters .
He meant not to be unkind , however , and , as a mark of his affection for the three girls , he left them a thousand pounds a-piece .
Mr .
Dashwood 's disappointment was , at first , severe ; but his temper was cheerful and sanguine ; and he might reasonably hope to live many years , and by living economically , lay by a considerable sum from the produce of an estate already large , and capable of almost immediate improvement .
But the fortune , which had been so tardy in coming , was his only one twelvemonth .
He survived his uncle no longer ; and ten thousand pounds , including the late legacies , was all that remained for his widow and daughters .
His son was sent for as soon as his danger was known , and to him Mr .
Dashwood recommended , with all the strength and urgency which illness could command , the interest of his mother-in-law and sisters .
Mr .
John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of the rest of the family ; but he was affected by a recommendation of such a nature at such a time , and he promised to do every thing in his power to make them comfortable .
His father was rendered easy by such an assurance , and Mr .
John Dashwood had then leisure to consider how much there might prudently be in his power to do for them .
He was not an ill-disposed young man , unless to be rather cold hearted and rather selfish is to be ill-disposed : but he was , in general , well respected ; for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge of his ordinary duties .
Had he married a more amiable woman , he might have been made still more respectable than he was : -- he might even have been made amiable himself ; for he was very young when he married , and very fond of his wife .
But Mrs .
John Dashwood was a strong caricature of himself ; -- more narrow-minded and selfish .
When he gave his promise to his father , he meditated within himself to increase the fortunes of his sisters by the present of a thousand pounds a-piece .
He then really thought himself equal to it .
The prospect of four thousand a-year , in addition to his present income , besides the remaining half of his own mother 's fortune , warmed his heart , and made him feel capable of generosity. -- '' Yes , he would give them three thousand pounds : it would be liberal and handsome !
It would be enough to make them completely easy .
Three thousand pounds !
he could spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience . ''
-- He thought of it all day long , and for many days successively , and he did not repent .
No sooner was his father 's funeral over , than Mrs .
John Dashwood , without sending any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law , arrived with her child and their attendants .
No one could dispute her right to come ; the house was her husband 's from the moment of his father 's decease ; but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much the greater , and to a woman in Mrs .
Dashwood 's situation , with only common feelings , must have been highly unpleasing ; -- but in HER mind there was a sense of honor so keen , a generosity so romantic , that any offence of the kind , by whomsoever given or received , was to her a source of immoveable disgust .
Mrs .
John Dashwood had never been a favourite with any of her husband 's family ; but she had had no opportunity , till the present , of shewing them with how little attention to the comfort of other people she could act when occasion required it .
So acutely did Mrs .
Dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour , and so earnestly did she despise her daughter-in-law for it , that , on the arrival of the latter , she would have quitted the house for ever , had not the entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect on the propriety of going , and her own tender love for all her three children determined her afterwards to stay , and for their sakes avoid a breach with their brother .
Elinor , this eldest daughter , whose advice was so effectual , possessed a strength of understanding , and coolness of judgment , which qualified her , though only nineteen , to be the counsellor of her mother , and enabled her frequently to counteract , to the advantage of them all , that eagerness of mind in Mrs .
Dashwood which must generally have led to imprudence .
She had an excellent heart ; -- her disposition was affectionate , and her feelings were strong ; but she knew how to govern them : it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn ; and which one of her sisters had resolved never to be taught .
Marianne 's abilities were , in many respects , quite equal to Elinor 's .
She was sensible and clever ; but eager in everything : her sorrows , her joys , could have no moderation .
She was generous , amiable , interesting : she was everything but prudent .
The resemblance between her and her mother was strikingly great .
Elinor saw , with concern , the excess of her sister 's sensibility ; but by Mrs .
Dashwood it was valued and cherished .
They encouraged each other now in the violence of their affliction .
The agony of grief which overpowered them at first , was voluntarily renewed , was sought for , was created again and again .
They gave themselves up wholly to their sorrow , seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection that could afford it , and resolved against ever admitting consolation in future .
Elinor , too , was deeply afflicted ; but still she could struggle , she could exert herself .
She could consult with her brother , could receive her sister-in-law on her arrival , and treat her with proper attention ; and could strive to rouse her mother to similar exertion , and encourage her to similar forbearance .
Margaret , the other sister , was a good-humored , well-disposed girl ; but as she had already imbibed a good deal of Marianne 's romance , without having much of her sense , she did not , at thirteen , bid fair to equal her sisters at a more advanced period of life .
CHAPTER 2 Mrs .
John Dashwood now installed herself mistress of Norland ; and her mother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors .
As such , however , they were treated by her with quiet civility ; and by her husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybody beyond himself , his wife , and their child .
He really pressed them , with some earnestness , to consider Norland as their home ; and , as no plan appeared so eligible to Mrs .
Dashwood as remaining there till she could accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood , his invitation was accepted .
A continuance in a place where everything reminded her of former delight , was exactly what suited her mind .
In seasons of cheerfulness , no temper could be more cheerful than hers , or possess , in a greater degree , that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happiness itself .
But in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy , and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy .
Mrs .
John Dashwood did not at all approve of what her husband intended to do for his sisters .
To take three thousand pounds from the fortune of their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the most dreadful degree .
She begged him to think again on the subject .
How could he answer it to himself to rob his child , and his only child too , of so large a sum ?
And what possible claim could the Miss Dashwoods , who were related to him only by half blood , which she considered as no relationship at all , have on his generosity to so large an amount .
It was very well known that no affection was ever supposed to exist between the children of any man by different marriages ; and why was he to ruin himself , and their poor little Harry , by giving away all his money to his half sisters ?
`` It was my father 's last request to me , '' replied her husband , `` that I should assist his widow and daughters . ''
`` He did not know what he was talking of , I dare say ; ten to one but he was light-headed at the time .
Had he been in his right senses , he could not have thought of such a thing as begging you to give away half your fortune from your own child . ''
`` He did not stipulate for any particular sum , my dear Fanny ; he only requested me , in general terms , to assist them , and make their situation more comfortable than it was in his power to do .
Perhaps it would have been as well if he had left it wholly to myself .
He could hardly suppose I should neglect them .
But as he required the promise , I could not do less than give it ; at least I thought so at the time .
The promise , therefore , was given , and must be performed .
Something must be done for them whenever they leave Norland and settle in a new home . ''
`` Well , then , LET something be done for them ; but THAT something need not be three thousand pounds .
Consider , '' she added , `` that when the money is once parted with , it never can return .
Your sisters will marry , and it will be gone for ever .
If , indeed , it could be restored to our poor little boy -- '' '' Why , to be sure , '' said her husband , very gravely , '' that would make great difference .
The time may come when Harry will regret that so large a sum was parted with .
If he should have a numerous family , for instance , it would be a very convenient addition . ''
`` To be sure it would . ''
`` Perhaps , then , it would be better for all parties , if the sum were diminished one half. -- Five hundred pounds would be a prodigious increase to their fortunes ! ''
`` Oh !
beyond anything great !
What brother on earth would do half so much for his sisters , even if REALLY his sisters !
And as it is -- only half blood ! -- But you have such a generous spirit ! ''
`` I would not wish to do any thing mean , '' he replied .
`` One had rather , on such occasions , do too much than too little .
No one , at least , can think I have not done enough for them : even themselves , they can hardly expect more . ''
`` There is no knowing what THEY may expect , '' said the lady , `` but we are not to think of their expectations : the question is , what you can afford to do . ''
`` Certainly -- and I think I may afford to give them five hundred pounds a-piece .
As it is , without any addition of mine , they will each have about three thousand pounds on their mother 's death -- a very comfortable fortune for any young woman . ''
`` To be sure it is ; and , indeed , it strikes me that they can want no addition at all .
They will have ten thousand pounds divided amongst them .
If they marry , they will be sure of doing well , and if they do not , they may all live very comfortably together on the interest of ten thousand pounds . ''
`` That is very true , and , therefore , I do not know whether , upon the whole , it would not be more advisable to do something for their mother while she lives , rather than for them -- something of the annuity kind I mean. -- My sisters would feel the good effects of it as well as herself .
A hundred a year would make them all perfectly comfortable . ''
His wife hesitated a little , however , in giving her consent to this plan .
`` To be sure , '' said she , `` it is better than parting with fifteen hundred pounds at once .
But , then , if Mrs .
Dashwood should live fifteen years we shall be completely taken in . ''
`` Fifteen years !
my dear Fanny ; her life can not be worth half that purchase . ''
`` Certainly not ; but if you observe , people always live for ever when there is an annuity to be paid them ; and she is very stout and healthy , and hardly forty .
An annuity is a very serious business ; it comes over and over every year , and there is no getting rid of it .
You are not aware of what you are doing .
I have known a great deal of the trouble of annuities ; for my mother was clogged with the payment of three to old superannuated servants by my father 's will , and it is amazing how disagreeable she found it .
Twice every year these annuities were to be paid ; and then there was the trouble of getting it to them ; and then one of them was said to have died , and afterwards it turned out to be no such thing .
My mother was quite sick of it .
Her income was not her own , she said , with such perpetual claims on it ; and it was the more unkind in my father , because , otherwise , the money would have been entirely at my mother 's disposal , without any restriction whatever .
It has given me such an abhorrence of annuities , that I am sure I would not pin myself down to the payment of one for all the world . ''
`` It is certainly an unpleasant thing , '' replied Mr .
Dashwood , '' to have those kind of yearly drains on one 's income .
One 's fortune , as your mother justly says , is NOT one 's own .
To be tied down to the regular payment of such a sum , on every rent day , is by no means desirable : it takes away one 's independence . ''
`` Undoubtedly ; and after all you have no thanks for it .
They think themselves secure , you do no more than what is expected , and it raises no gratitude at all .
If I were you , whatever I did should be done at my own discretion entirely .
I would not bind myself to allow them any thing yearly .
It may be very inconvenient some years to spare a hundred , or even fifty pounds from our own expenses . ''
`` I believe you are right , my love ; it will be better that there should by no annuity in the case ; whatever I may give them occasionally will be of far greater assistance than a yearly allowance , because they would only enlarge their style of living if they felt sure of a larger income , and would not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of the year .
It will certainly be much the best way .
A present of fifty pounds , now and then , will prevent their ever being distressed for money , and will , I think , be amply discharging my promise to my father . ''
`` To be sure it will .
Indeed , to say the truth , I am convinced within myself that your father had no idea of your giving them any money at all .
The assistance he thought of , I dare say , was only such as might be reasonably expected of you ; for instance , such as looking out for a comfortable small house for them , helping them to move their things , and sending them presents of fish and game , and so forth , whenever they are in season .
I 'll lay my life that he meant nothing farther ; indeed , it would be very strange and unreasonable if he did .
Do but consider , my dear Mr .
Dashwood , how excessively comfortable your mother-in-law and her daughters may live on the interest of seven thousand pounds , besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the girls , which brings them in fifty pounds a year a-piece , and , of course , they will pay their mother for their board out of it .
Altogether , they will have five hundred a-year amongst them , and what on earth can four women want for more than that ? -- They will live so cheap !
Their housekeeping will be nothing at all .
They will have no carriage , no horses , and hardly any servants ; they will keep no company , and can have no expenses of any kind !
Only conceive how comfortable they will be !
Five hundred a year !
I am sure I can not imagine how they will spend half of it ; and as to your giving them more , it is quite absurd to think of it .
They will be much more able to give YOU something . ''
`` Upon my word , '' said Mr .
Dashwood , `` I believe you are perfectly right .
My father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me than what you say .
I clearly understand it now , and I will strictly fulfil my engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as you have described .
When my mother removes into another house my services shall be readily given to accommodate her as far as I can .
Some little present of furniture too may be acceptable then . ''
`` Certainly , '' returned Mrs .
John Dashwood .
`` But , however , ONE thing must be considered .
When your father and mother moved to Norland , though the furniture of Stanhill was sold , all the china , plate , and linen was saved , and is now left to your mother .
Her house will therefore be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it . ''
`` That is a material consideration undoubtedly .
A valuable legacy indeed !
And yet some of the plate would have been a very pleasant addition to our own stock here . ''
`` Yes ; and the set of breakfast china is twice as handsome as what belongs to this house .
A great deal too handsome , in my opinion , for any place THEY can ever afford to live in .
But , however , so it is .
Your father thought only of THEM .
And I must say this : that you owe no particular gratitude to him , nor attention to his wishes ; for we very well know that if he could , he would have left almost everything in the world to THEM . ''
This argument was irresistible .
It gave to his intentions whatever of decision was wanting before ; and he finally resolved , that it would be absolutely unnecessary , if not highly indecorous , to do more for the widow and children of his father , than such kind of neighbourly acts as his own wife pointed out .
CHAPTER 3 Mrs .
Dashwood remained at Norland several months ; not from any disinclination to move when the sight of every well known spot ceased to raise the violent emotion which it produced for a while ; for when her spirits began to revive , and her mind became capable of some other exertion than that of heightening its affliction by melancholy remembrances , she was impatient to be gone , and indefatigable in her inquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of Norland ; for to remove far from that beloved spot was impossible .
But she could hear of no situation that at once answered her notions of comfort and ease , and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter , whose steadier judgment rejected several houses as too large for their income , which her mother would have approved .
Mrs .
Dashwood had been informed by her husband of the solemn promise on the part of his son in their favour , which gave comfort to his last earthly reflections .
She doubted the sincerity of this assurance no more than he had doubted it himself , and she thought of it for her daughters' sake with satisfaction , though as for herself she was persuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000L would support her in affluence .
For their brother 's sake , too , for the sake of his own heart , she rejoiced ; and she reproached herself for being unjust to his merit before , in believing him incapable of generosity .
His attentive behaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her that their welfare was dear to him , and , for a long time , she firmly relied on the liberality of his intentions .
The contempt which she had , very early in their acquaintance , felt for her daughter-in-law , was very much increased by the farther knowledge of her character , which half a year 's residence in her family afforded ; and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternal affection on the side of the former , the two ladies might have found it impossible to have lived together so long , had not a particular circumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility , according to the opinions of Mrs .
Dashwood , to her daughters ' continuance at Norland .
This circumstance was a growing attachment between her eldest girl and the brother of Mrs .
John Dashwood , a gentleman-like and pleasing young man , who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister 's establishment at Norland , and who had since spent the greatest part of his time there .
Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives of interest , for Edward Ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had died very rich ; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence , for , except a trifling sum , the whole of his fortune depended on the will of his mother .
But Mrs .
Dashwood was alike uninfluenced by either consideration .
It was enough for her that he appeared to be amiable , that he loved her daughter , and that Elinor returned the partiality .
It was contrary to every doctrine of her 's that difference of fortune should keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance of disposition ; and that Elinor 's merit should not be acknowledged by every one who knew her , was to her comprehension impossible .
Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by any peculiar graces of person or address .
He was not handsome , and his manners required intimacy to make them pleasing .
He was too diffident to do justice to himself ; but when his natural shyness was overcome , his behaviour gave every indication of an open , affectionate heart .
His understanding was good , and his education had given it solid improvement .
But he was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition to answer the wishes of his mother and sister , who longed to see him distinguished -- as -- they hardly knew what .
They wanted him to make a fine figure in the world in some manner or other .
His mother wished to interest him in political concerns , to get him into parliament , or to see him connected with some of the great men of the day .
Mrs .
John Dashwood wished it likewise ; but in the mean while , till one of these superior blessings could be attained , it would have quieted her ambition to see him driving a barouche .
But Edward had no turn for great men or barouches .
All his wishes centered in domestic comfort and the quiet of private life .
Fortunately he had a younger brother who was more promising .
Edward had been staying several weeks in the house before he engaged much of Mrs .
Dashwood 's attention ; for she was , at that time , in such affliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects .
She saw only that he was quiet and unobtrusive , and she liked him for it .
He did not disturb the wretchedness of her mind by ill-timed conversation .
She was first called to observe and approve him farther , by a reflection which Elinor chanced one day to make on the difference between him and his sister .
It was a contrast which recommended him most forcibly to her mother .
`` It is enough , '' said she ; `` to say that he is unlike Fanny is enough .
It implies everything amiable .
I love him already . ''
`` I think you will like him , '' said Elinor , `` when you know more of him . ''
`` Like him ! ''
replied her mother with a smile .
`` I feel no sentiment of approbation inferior to love . ''
`` You may esteem him . ''
`` I have never yet known what it was to separate esteem and love . ''
Mrs .
Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him .
Her manners were attaching , and soon banished his reserve .
She speedily comprehended all his merits ; the persuasion of his regard for Elinor perhaps assisted her penetration ; but she really felt assured of his worth : and even that quietness of manner , which militated against all her established ideas of what a young man 's address ought to be , was no longer uninteresting when she knew his heart to be warm and his temper affectionate .
No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in his behaviour to Elinor , than she considered their serious attachment as certain , and looked forward to their marriage as rapidly approaching .
`` In a few months , my dear Marianne . ''
said she , '' Elinor will , in all probability be settled for life .
We shall miss her ; but SHE will be happy . ''
`` Oh !
Mamma , how shall we do without her ? ''
`` My love , it will be scarcely a separation .
We shall live within a few miles of each other , and shall meet every day of our lives .
You will gain a brother , a real , affectionate brother .
I have the highest opinion in the world of Edward 's heart .
But you look grave , Marianne ; do you disapprove your sister 's choice ? ''
`` Perhaps , '' said Marianne , `` I may consider it with some surprise .
Edward is very amiable , and I love him tenderly .
But yet -- he is not the kind of young man -- there is something wanting -- his figure is not striking ; it has none of that grace which I should expect in the man who could seriously attach my sister .
His eyes want all that spirit , that fire , which at once announce virtue and intelligence .
And besides all this , I am afraid , Mamma , he has no real taste .
Music seems scarcely to attract him , and though he admires Elinor's drawings very much , it is not the admiration of a person who can understand their worth .
It is evident , in spite of his frequent attention to her while she draws , that in fact he knows nothing of the matter .
He admires as a lover , not as a connoisseur .
To satisfy me , those characters must be united .
I could not be happy with a man whose taste did not in every point coincide with my own .
He must enter into all my feelings ; the same books , the same music must charm us both .
Oh !
mama , how spiritless , how tame was Edward 's manner in reading to us last night !
I felt for my sister most severely .
Yet she bore it with so much composure , she seemed scarcely to notice it .
I could hardly keep my seat .
To hear those beautiful lines which have frequently almost driven me wild , pronounced with such impenetrable calmness , such dreadful indifference ! ''
-- '' He would certainly have done more justice to simple and elegant prose .
I thought so at the time ; but you WOULD give him Cowper . ''
`` Nay , Mamma , if he is not to be animated by Cowper ! -- but we must allow for difference of taste .
Elinor has not my feelings , and therefore she may overlook it , and be happy with him .
But it would have broke MY heart , had I loved him , to hear him read with so little sensibility .
Mama , the more I know of the world , the more am I convinced that I shall never see a man whom I can really love .
I require so much !
He must have all Edward 's virtues , and his person and manners must ornament his goodness with every possible charm . ''
`` Remember , my love , that you are not seventeen .
It is yet too early in life to despair of such a happiness .
Why should you be less fortunate than your mother ?
In one circumstance only , my Marianne , may your destiny be different from her 's ! ''
CHAPTER 4 '' What a pity it is , Elinor , '' said Marianne , '' that Edward should have no taste for drawing . ''
`` No taste for drawing ! ''
replied Elinor , `` why should you think so ?
He does not draw himself , indeed , but he has great pleasure in seeing the performances of other people , and I assure you he is by no means deficient in natural taste , though he has not had opportunities of improving it .
Had he ever been in the way of learning , I think he would have drawn very well .
He distrusts his own judgment in such matters so much , that he is always unwilling to give his opinion on any picture ; but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste , which in general direct him perfectly right . ''
Marianne was afraid of offending , and said no more on the subject ; but the kind of approbation which Elinor described as excited in him by the drawings of other people , was very far from that rapturous delight , which , in her opinion , could alone be called taste .
Yet , though smiling within herself at the mistake , she honoured her sister for that blind partiality to Edward which produced it .
`` I hope , Marianne , '' continued Elinor , `` you do not consider him as deficient in general taste .
Indeed , I think I may say that you can not , for your behaviour to him is perfectly cordial , and if THAT were your opinion , I am sure you could never be civil to him . ''
Marianne hardly knew what to say .
She would not wound the feelings of her sister on any account , and yet to say what she did not believe was impossible .
At length she replied : '' Do not be offended , Elinor , if my praise of him is not in every thing equal to your sense of his merits .
I have not had so many opportunities of estimating the minuter propensities of his mind , his inclinations and tastes , as you have ; but I have the highest opinion in the world of his goodness and sense .
I think him every thing that is worthy and amiable . ''
`` I am sure , '' replied Elinor , with a smile , '' that his dearest friends could not be dissatisfied with such commendation as that .
I do not perceive how you could express yourself more warmly . ''
Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased .
`` Of his sense and his goodness , '' continued Elinor , '' no one can , I think , be in doubt , who has seen him often enough to engage him in unreserved conversation .
The excellence of his understanding and his principles can be concealed only by that shyness which too often keeps him silent .
You know enough of him to do justice to his solid worth .
But of his minuter propensities , as you call them you have from peculiar circumstances been kept more ignorant than myself .
He and I have been at times thrown a good deal together , while you have been wholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle by my mother .
I have seen a great deal of him , have studied his sentiments and heard his opinion on subjects of literature and taste ; and , upon the whole , I venture to pronounce that his mind is well-informed , enjoyment of books exceedingly great , his imagination lively , his observation just and correct , and his taste delicate and pure .
His abilities in every respect improve as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person .
At first sight , his address is certainly not striking ; and his person can hardly be called handsome , till the expression of his eyes , which are uncommonly good , and the general sweetness of his countenance , is perceived .
At present , I know him so well , that I think him really handsome ; or at least , almost so .
What say you , Marianne ? ''
`` I shall very soon think him handsome , Elinor , if I do not now .
When you tell me to love him as a brother , I shall no more see imperfection in his face , than I now do in his heart . ''
Elinor started at this declaration , and was sorry for the warmth she had been betrayed into , in speaking of him .
She felt that Edward stood very high in her opinion .
She believed the regard to be mutual ; but she required greater certainty of it to make Marianne 's conviction of their attachment agreeable to her .
She knew that what Marianne and her mother conjectured one moment , they believed the next -- that with them , to wish was to hope , and to hope was to expect .
She tried to explain the real state of the case to her sister .
`` I do not attempt to deny , '' said she , `` that I think very highly of him -- that I greatly esteem , that I like him . ''
Marianne here burst forth with indignation -- '' Esteem him !
Like him !
Cold-hearted Elinor !
Oh !
worse than cold-hearted !
Ashamed of being otherwise .
Use those words again , and I will leave the room this moment . ''
Elinor could not help laughing .
`` Excuse me , '' said she ; `` and be assured that I meant no offence to you , by speaking , in so quiet a way , of my own feelings .
Believe them to be stronger than I have declared ; believe them , in short , to be such as his merit , and the suspicion -- the hope of his affection for me may warrant , without imprudence or folly .
But farther than this you must not believe .
I am by no means assured of his regard for me .
There are moments when the extent of it seems doubtful ; and till his sentiments are fully known , you can not wonder at my wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality , by believing or calling it more than it is .
In my heart I feel little -- scarcely any doubt of his preference .
But there are other points to be considered besides his inclination .
He is very far from being independent .
What his mother really is we can not know ; but , from Fanny's occasional mention of her conduct and opinions , we have never been disposed to think her amiable ; and I am very much mistaken if Edward is not himself aware that there would be many difficulties in his way , if he were to wish to marry a woman who had not either a great fortune or high rank . ''
Marianne was astonished to find how much the imagination of her mother and herself had outstripped the truth .
`` And you really are not engaged to him ! ''
said she .
`` Yet it certainly soon will happen .
But two advantages will proceed from this delay .
I shall not lose you so soon , and Edward will have greater opportunity of improving that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must be so indispensably necessary to your future felicity .
Oh !
if he should be so far stimulated by your genius as to learn to draw himself , how delightful it would be ! ''
Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister .
She could not consider her partiality for Edward in so prosperous a state as Marianne had believed it .
There was , at times , a want of spirits about him which , if it did not denote indifference , spoke of something almost as unpromising .
A doubt of her regard , supposing him to feel it , need not give him more than inquietude .
It would not be likely to produce that dejection of mind which frequently attended him .
A more reasonable cause might be found in the dependent situation which forbade the indulgence of his affection .
She knew that his mother neither behaved to him so as to make his home comfortable at present , nor to give him any assurance that he might form a home for himself , without strictly attending to her views for his aggrandizement .
With such a knowledge as this , it was impossible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject .
She was far from depending on that result of his preference of her , which her mother and sister still considered as certain .
Nay , the longer they were together the more doubtful seemed the nature of his regard ; and sometimes , for a few painful minutes , she believed it to be no more than friendship .
But , whatever might really be its limits , it was enough , when perceived by his sister , to make her uneasy , and at the same time , ( which was still more common , ) to make her uncivil .
She took the first opportunity of affronting her mother-in-law on the occasion , talking to her so expressively of her brother 's great expectations , of Mrs .
Ferrars 's resolution that both her sons should marry well , and of the danger attending any young woman who attempted to DRAW HIM IN ; that Mrs .
Dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious , nor endeavor to be calm .
She gave her an answer which marked her contempt , and instantly left the room , resolving that , whatever might be the inconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal , her beloved Elinor should not be exposed another week to such insinuations .
In this state of her spirits , a letter was delivered to her from the post , which contained a proposal particularly well timed .
It was the offer of a small house , on very easy terms , belonging to a relation of her own , a gentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire .
The letter was from this gentleman himself , and written in the true spirit of friendly accommodation .
He understood that she was in need of a dwelling ; and though the house he now offered her was merely a cottage , he assured her that everything should be done to it which she might think necessary , if the situation pleased her .
He earnestly pressed her , after giving the particulars of the house and garden , to come with her daughters to Barton Park , the place of his own residence , from whence she might judge , herself , whether Barton Cottage , for the houses were in the same parish , could , by any alteration , be made comfortable to her .
He seemed really anxious to accommodate them and the whole of his letter was written in so friendly a style as could not fail of giving pleasure to his cousin ; more especially at a moment when she was suffering under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of her nearer connections .
She needed no time for deliberation or inquiry .
Her resolution was formed as she read .
The situation of Barton , in a county so far distant from Sussex as Devonshire , which , but a few hours before , would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh every possible advantage belonging to the place , was now its first recommendation .
To quit the neighbourhood of Norland was no longer an evil ; it was an object of desire ; it was a blessing , in comparison of the misery of continuing her daughter-in-law 's guest ; and to remove for ever from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit or visit it while such a woman was its mistress .
She instantly wrote Sir John Middleton her acknowledgment of his kindness , and her acceptance of his proposal ; and then hastened to shew both letters to her daughters , that she might be secure of their approbation before her answer were sent .
Elinor had always thought it would be more prudent for them to settle at some distance from Norland , than immediately amongst their present acquaintance .
On THAT head , therefore , it was not for her to oppose her mother 's intention of removing into Devonshire .
The house , too , as described by Sir John , was on so simple a scale , and the rent so uncommonly moderate , as to leave her no right of objection on either point ; and , therefore , though it was not a plan which brought any charm to her fancy , though it was a removal from the vicinity of Norland beyond her wishes , she made no attempt to dissuade her mother from sending a letter of acquiescence .
CHAPTER 5 No sooner was her answer dispatched , than Mrs .
Dashwood indulged herself in the pleasure of announcing to her son-in-law and his wife that she was provided with a house , and should incommode them no longer than till every thing were ready for her inhabiting it .
They heard her with surprise .
Mrs .
John Dashwood said nothing ; but her husband civilly hoped that she would not be settled far from Norland .
She had great satisfaction in replying that she was going into Devonshire. -- Edward turned hastily towards her , on hearing this , and , in a voice of surprise and concern , which required no explanation to her , repeated , '' Devonshire !
Are you , indeed , going there ?
So far from hence !
And to what part of it ? ''
She explained the situation .
It was within four miles northward of Exeter .
`` It is but a cottage , '' she continued , `` but I hope to see many of my friends in it .
A room or two can easily be added ; and if my friends find no difficulty in travelling so far to see me , I am sure I will find none in accommodating them . ''
She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr .
and Mrs .
John Dashwood to visit her at Barton ; and to Edward she gave one with still greater affection .
Though her late conversation with her daughter-in-law had made her resolve on remaining at Norland no longer than was unavoidable , it had not produced the smallest effect on her in that point to which it principally tended .
To separate Edward and Elinor was as far from being her object as ever ; and she wished to show Mrs .
John Dashwood , by this pointed invitation to her brother , how totally she disregarded her disapprobation of the match .
Mr .
John Dashwood told his mother again and again how exceedingly sorry he was that she had taken a house at such a distance from Norland as to prevent his being of any service to her in removing her furniture .
He really felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion ; for the very exertion to which he had limited the performance of his promise to his father was by this arrangement rendered impracticable. -- The furniture was all sent around by water .
It chiefly consisted of household linen , plate , china , and books , with a handsome pianoforte of Marianne 's .
Mrs .
John Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh : she could not help feeling it hard that as Mrs .
Dashwood 's income would be so trifling in comparison with their own , she should have any handsome article of furniture .
Mrs .
Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth ; it was ready furnished , and she might have immediate possession .
No difficulty arose on either side in the agreement ; and she waited only for the disposal of her effects at Norland , and to determine her future household , before she set off for the west ; and this , as she was exceedingly rapid in the performance of everything that interested her , was soon done. -- The horses which were left her by her husband had been sold soon after his death , and an opportunity now offering of disposing of her carriage , she agreed to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of her eldest daughter .
For the comfort of her children , had she consulted only her own wishes , she would have kept it ; but the discretion of Elinor prevailed .
HER wisdom too limited the number of their servants to three ; two maids and a man , with whom they were speedily provided from amongst those who had formed their establishment at Norland .
The man and one of the maids were sent off immediately into Devonshire , to prepare the house for their mistress's arrival ; for as Lady Middleton was entirely unknown to Mrs .
Dashwood , she preferred going directly to the cottage to being a visitor at Barton Park ; and she relied so undoubtingly on Sir John 's description of the house , as to feel no curiosity to examine it herself till she entered it as her own .
Her eagerness to be gone from Norland was preserved from diminution by the evident satisfaction of her daughter-in-law in the prospect of her removal ; a satisfaction which was but feebly attempted to be concealed under a cold invitation to her to defer her departure .
Now was the time when her son-in-law 's promise to his father might with particular propriety be fulfilled .
Since he had neglected to do it on first coming to the estate , their quitting his house might be looked on as the most suitable period for its accomplishment .
But Mrs .
Dashwood began shortly to give over every hope of the kind , and to be convinced , from the general drift of his discourse , that his assistance extended no farther than their maintenance for six months at Norland .
He so frequently talked of the increasing expenses of housekeeping , and of the perpetual demands upon his purse , which a man of any consequence in the world was beyond calculation exposed to , that he seemed rather to stand in need of more money himself than to have any design of giving money away .
In a very few weeks from the day which brought Sir John Middleton 's first letter to Norland , every thing was so far settled in their future abode as to enable Mrs .
Dashwood and her daughters to begin their journey .
Many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to a place so much beloved .
`` Dear , dear Norland ! ''
said Marianne , as she wandered alone before the house , on the last evening of their being there ; `` when shall I cease to regret you ! -- when learn to feel a home elsewhere ! -- Oh !
happy house , could you know what I suffer in now viewing you from this spot , from whence perhaps I may view you no more ! -- And you , ye well-known trees ! -- but you will continue the same. -- No leaf will decay because we are removed , nor any branch become motionless although we can observe you no longer ! -- No ; you will continue the same ; unconscious of the pleasure or the regret you occasion , and insensible of any change in those who walk under your shade ! -- But who will remain to enjoy you ? ''
CHAPTER 6 The first part of their journey was performed in too melancholy a disposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant .
But as they drew towards the end of it , their interest in the appearance of a country which they were to inhabit overcame their dejection , and a view of Barton Valley as they entered it gave them cheerfulness .
It was a pleasant fertile spot , well wooded , and rich in pasture .
After winding along it for more than a mile , they reached their own house .
A small green court was the whole of its demesne in front ; and a neat wicket gate admitted them into it .
As a house , Barton Cottage , though small , was comfortable and compact ; but as a cottage it was defective , for the building was regular , the roof was tiled , the window shutters were not painted green , nor were the walls covered with honeysuckles .
A narrow passage led directly through the house into the garden behind .
On each side of the entrance was a sitting room , about sixteen feet square ; and beyond them were the offices and the stairs .
Four bed-rooms and two garrets formed the rest of the house .
It had not been built many years and was in good repair .
In comparison of Norland , it was poor and small indeed ! -- but the tears which recollection called forth as they entered the house were soon dried away .
They were cheered by the joy of the servants on their arrival , and each for the sake of the others resolved to appear happy .
It was very early in September ; the season was fine , and from first seeing the place under the advantage of good weather , they received an impression in its favour which was of material service in recommending it to their lasting approbation .
The situation of the house was good .
High hills rose immediately behind , and at no great distance on each side ; some of which were open downs , the others cultivated and woody .
The village of Barton was chiefly on one of these hills , and formed a pleasant view from the cottage windows .
The prospect in front was more extensive ; it commanded the whole of the valley , and reached into the country beyond .
The hills which surrounded the cottage terminated the valley in that direction ; under another name , and in another course , it branched out again between two of the steepest of them .
With the size and furniture of the house Mrs .
Dashwood was upon the whole well satisfied ; for though her former style of life rendered many additions to the latter indispensable , yet to add and improve was a delight to her ; and she had at this time ready money enough to supply all that was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments .
`` As for the house itself , to be sure , '' said she , `` it is too small for our family , but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for the present , as it is too late in the year for improvements .
Perhaps in the spring , if I have plenty of money , as I dare say I shall , we may think about building .
These parlors are both too small for such parties of our friends as I hope to see often collected here ; and I have some thoughts of throwing the passage into one of them with perhaps a part of the other , and so leave the remainder of that other for an entrance ; this , with a new drawing room which may be easily added , and a bed-chamber and garret above , will make it a very snug little cottage .
I could wish the stairs were handsome .
But one must not expect every thing ; though I suppose it would be no difficult matter to widen them .
I shall see how much I am before-hand with the world in the spring , and we will plan our improvements accordingly . ''
In the mean time , till all these alterations could be made from the savings of an income of five hundred a-year by a woman who never saved in her life , they were wise enough to be contented with the house as it was ; and each of them was busy in arranging their particular concerns , and endeavoring , by placing around them books and other possessions , to form themselves a home .
Marianne 's pianoforte was unpacked and properly disposed of ; and Elinor 's drawings were affixed to the walls of their sitting room .
In such employments as these they were interrupted soon after breakfast the next day by the entrance of their landlord , who called to welcome them to Barton , and to offer them every accommodation from his own house and garden in which theirs might at present be deficient .
Sir John Middleton was a good looking man about forty .
He had formerly visited at Stanhill , but it was too long for his young cousins to remember him .
His countenance was thoroughly good-humoured ; and his manners were as friendly as the style of his letter .
Their arrival seemed to afford him real satisfaction , and their comfort to be an object of real solicitude to him .
He said much of his earnest desire of their living in the most sociable terms with his family , and pressed them so cordially to dine at Barton Park every day till they were better settled at home , that , though his entreaties were carried to a point of perseverance beyond civility , they could not give offence .
His kindness was not confined to words ; for within an hour after he left them , a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit arrived from the park , which was followed before the end of the day by a present of game .
He insisted , moreover , on conveying all their letters to and from the post for them , and would not be denied the satisfaction of sending them his newspaper every day .
Lady Middleton had sent a very civil message by him , denoting her intention of waiting on Mrs .
Dashwood as soon as she could be assured that her visit would be no inconvenience ; and as this message was answered by an invitation equally polite , her ladyship was introduced to them the next day .
They were , of course , very anxious to see a person on whom so much of their comfort at Barton must depend ; and the elegance of her appearance was favourable to their wishes .
Lady Middleton was not more than six or seven and twenty ; her face was handsome , her figure tall and striking , and her address graceful .
Her manners had all the elegance which her husband 's wanted .
But they would have been improved by some share of his frankness and warmth ; and her visit was long enough to detract something from their first admiration , by shewing that , though perfectly well-bred , she was reserved , cold , and had nothing to say for herself beyond the most common-place inquiry or remark .
Conversation however was not wanted , for Sir John was very chatty , and Lady Middleton had taken the wise precaution of bringing with her their eldest child , a fine little boy about six years old , by which means there was one subject always to be recurred to by the ladies in case of extremity , for they had to enquire his name and age , admire his beauty , and ask him questions which his mother answered for him , while he hung about her and held down his head , to the great surprise of her ladyship , who wondered at his being so shy before company , as he could make noise enough at home .
On every formal visit a child ought to be of the party , by way of provision for discourse .
In the present case it took up ten minutes to determine whether the boy were most like his father or mother , and in what particular he resembled either , for of course every body differed , and every body was astonished at the opinion of the others .
An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dashwoods of debating on the rest of the children , as Sir John would not leave the house without securing their promise of dining at the park the next day .
CHAPTER 7 Barton Park was about half a mile from the cottage .
The ladies had passed near it in their way along the valley , but it was screened from their view at home by the projection of a hill .
The house was large and handsome ; and the Middletons lived in a style of equal hospitality and elegance .
The former was for Sir John 's gratification , the latter for that of his lady .
They were scarcely ever without some friends staying with them in the house , and they kept more company of every kind than any other family in the neighbourhood .
It was necessary to the happiness of both ; for however dissimilar in temper and outward behaviour , they strongly resembled each other in that total want of talent and taste which confined their employments , unconnected with such as society produced , within a very narrow compass .
Sir John was a sportsman , Lady Middleton a mother .
He hunted and shot , and she humoured her children ; and these were their only resources .
Lady Middleton had the advantage of being able to spoil her children all the year round , while Sir John 's independent employments were in existence only half the time .
Continual engagements at home and abroad , however , supplied all the deficiencies of nature and education ; supported the good spirits of Sir John , and gave exercise to the good breeding of his wife .
Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the elegance of her table , and of all her domestic arrangements ; and from this kind of vanity was her greatest enjoyment in any of their parties .
But Sir John 's satisfaction in society was much more real ; he delighted in collecting about him more young people than his house would hold , and the noisier they were the better was he pleased .
He was a blessing to all the juvenile part of the neighbourhood , for in summer he was for ever forming parties to eat cold ham and chicken out of doors , and in winter his private balls were numerous enough for any young lady who was not suffering under the unsatiable appetite of fifteen .
The arrival of a new family in the country was always a matter of joy to him , and in every point of view he was charmed with the inhabitants he had now procured for his cottage at Barton .
The Miss Dashwoods were young , pretty , and unaffected .
It was enough to secure his good opinion ; for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl could want to make her mind as captivating as her person .
The friendliness of his disposition made him happy in accommodating those , whose situation might be considered , in comparison with the past , as unfortunate .
In showing kindness to his cousins therefore he had the real satisfaction of a good heart ; and in settling a family of females only in his cottage , he had all the satisfaction of a sportsman ; for a sportsman , though he esteems only those of his sex who are sportsmen likewise , is not often desirous of encouraging their taste by admitting them to a residence within his own manor .
Mrs .
Dashwood and her daughters were met at the door of the house by Sir John , who welcomed them to Barton Park with unaffected sincerity ; and as he attended them to the drawing room repeated to the young ladies the concern which the same subject had drawn from him the day before , at being unable to get any smart young men to meet them .
They would see , he said , only one gentleman there besides himself ; a particular friend who was staying at the park , but who was neither very young nor very gay .
He hoped they would all excuse the smallness of the party , and could assure them it should never happen so again .
He had been to several families that morning in hopes of procuring some addition to their number , but it was moonlight and every body was full of engagements .
Luckily Lady Middleton 's mother had arrived at Barton within the last hour , and as she was a very cheerful agreeable woman , he hoped the young ladies would not find it so very dull as they might imagine .
The young ladies , as well as their mother , were perfectly satisfied with having two entire strangers of the party , and wished for no more .
Mrs .
Jennings , Lady Middleton 's mother , was a good-humoured , merry , fat , elderly woman , who talked a great deal , seemed very happy , and rather vulgar .
She was full of jokes and laughter , and before dinner was over had said many witty things on the subject of lovers and husbands ; hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in Sussex , and pretended to see them blush whether they did or not .
Marianne was vexed at it for her sister 's sake , and turned her eyes towards Elinor to see how she bore these attacks , with an earnestness which gave Elinor far more pain than could arise from such common-place raillery as Mrs .
Jennings 's .
Colonel Brandon , the friend of Sir John , seemed no more adapted by resemblance of manner to be his friend , than Lady Middleton was to be his wife , or Mrs .
Jennings to be Lady Middleton 's mother .
He was silent and grave .
His appearance however was not unpleasing , in spite of his being in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret an absolute old bachelor , for he was on the wrong side of five and thirty ; but though his face was not handsome , his countenance was sensible , and his address was particularly gentlemanlike .
There was nothing in any of the party which could recommend them as companions to the Dashwoods ; but the cold insipidity of Lady Middleton was so particularly repulsive , that in comparison of it the gravity of Colonel Brandon , and even the boisterous mirth of Sir John and his mother-in-law was interesting .
Lady Middleton seemed to be roused to enjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy children after dinner , who pulled her about , tore her clothes , and put an end to every kind of discourse except what related to themselves .
In the evening , as Marianne was discovered to be musical , she was invited to play .
The instrument was unlocked , every body prepared to be charmed , and Marianne , who sang very well , at their request went through the chief of the songs which Lady Middleton had brought into the family on her marriage , and which perhaps had lain ever since in the same position on the pianoforte , for her ladyship had celebrated that event by giving up music , although by her mother 's account , she had played extremely well , and by her own was very fond of it .
Marianne 's performance was highly applauded .
Sir John was loud in his admiration at the end of every song , and as loud in his conversation with the others while every song lasted .
Lady Middleton frequently called him to order , wondered how any one 's attention could be diverted from music for a moment , and asked Marianne to sing a particular song which Marianne had just finished .
Colonel Brandon alone , of all the party , heard her without being in raptures .
He paid her only the compliment of attention ; and she felt a respect for him on the occasion , which the others had reasonably forfeited by their shameless want of taste .
His pleasure in music , though it amounted not to that ecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with her own , was estimable when contrasted against the horrible insensibility of the others ; and she was reasonable enough to allow that a man of five and thirty might well have outlived all acuteness of feeling and every exquisite power of enjoyment .
She was perfectly disposed to make every allowance for the colonel 's advanced state of life which humanity required .
CHAPTER 8 Mrs .
Jennings was a widow with an ample jointure .
She had only two daughters , both of whom she had lived to see respectably married , and she had now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest of the world .
In the promotion of this object she was zealously active , as far as her ability reached ; and missed no opportunity of projecting weddings among all the young people of her acquaintance .
She was remarkably quick in the discovery of attachments , and had enjoyed the advantage of raising the blushes and the vanity of many a young lady by insinuations of her power over such a young man ; and this kind of discernment enabled her soon after her arrival at Barton decisively to pronounce that Colonel Brandon was very much in love with Marianne Dashwood .
She rather suspected it to be so , on the very first evening of their being together , from his listening so attentively while she sang to them ; and when the visit was returned by the Middletons ' dining at the cottage , the fact was ascertained by his listening to her again .
It must be so .
She was perfectly convinced of it .
It would be an excellent match , for HE was rich , and SHE was handsome .
Mrs .
Jennings had been anxious to see Colonel Brandon well married , ever since her connection with Sir John first brought him to her knowledge ; and she was always anxious to get a good husband for every pretty girl .
The immediate advantage to herself was by no means inconsiderable , for it supplied her with endless jokes against them both .
At the park she laughed at the colonel , and in the cottage at Marianne .
To the former her raillery was probably , as far as it regarded only himself , perfectly indifferent ; but to the latter it was at first incomprehensible ; and when its object was understood , she hardly knew whether most to laugh at its absurdity , or censure its impertinence , for she considered it as an unfeeling reflection on the colonel 's advanced years , and on his forlorn condition as an old bachelor .
Mrs .
Dashwood , who could not think a man five years younger than herself , so exceedingly ancient as he appeared to the youthful fancy of her daughter , ventured to clear Mrs .
Jennings from the probability of wishing to throw ridicule on his age .
`` But at least , Mamma , you can not deny the absurdity of the accusation , though you may not think it intentionally ill-natured .
Colonel Brandon is certainly younger than Mrs .
Jennings , but he is old enough to be MY father ; and if he were ever animated enough to be in love , must have long outlived every sensation of the kind .
It is too ridiculous !
When is a man to be safe from such wit , if age and infirmity will not protect him ? ''
`` Infirmity ! ''
said Elinor , `` do you call Colonel Brandon infirm ?
I can easily suppose that his age may appear much greater to you than to my mother ; but you can hardly deceive yourself as to his having the use of his limbs ! ''
`` Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism ?
and is not that the commonest infirmity of declining life ? ''
`` My dearest child , '' said her mother , laughing , '' at this rate you must be in continual terror of MY decay ; and it must seem to you a miracle that my life has been extended to the advanced age of forty . ''
`` Mamma , you are not doing me justice .
I know very well that Colonel Brandon is not old enough to make his friends yet apprehensive of losing him in the course of nature .
He may live twenty years longer .
But thirty-five has nothing to do with matrimony . ''
`` Perhaps , '' said Elinor , `` thirty-five and seventeen had better not have any thing to do with matrimony together .
But if there should by any chance happen to be a woman who is single at seven and twenty , I should not think Colonel Brandon 's being thirty-five any objection to his marrying HER . ''
`` A woman of seven and twenty , '' said Marianne , after pausing a moment , `` can never hope to feel or inspire affection again , and if her home be uncomfortable , or her fortune small , I can suppose that she might bring herself to submit to the offices of a nurse , for the sake of the provision and security of a wife .
In his marrying such a woman therefore there would be nothing unsuitable .
It would be a compact of convenience , and the world would be satisfied .
In my eyes it would be no marriage at all , but that would be nothing .
To me it would seem only a commercial exchange , in which each wished to be benefited at the expense of the other . ''
`` It would be impossible , I know , '' replied Elinor , '' to convince you that a woman of seven and twenty could feel for a man of thirty-five anything near enough to love , to make him a desirable companion to her .
But I must object to your dooming Colonel Brandon and his wife to the constant confinement of a sick chamber , merely because he chanced to complain yesterday ( a very cold damp day ) of a slight rheumatic feel in one of his shoulders . ''
`` But he talked of flannel waistcoats , '' said Marianne ; '' and with me a flannel waistcoat is invariably connected with aches , cramps , rheumatisms , and every species of ailment that can afflict the old and the feeble . ''
`` Had he been only in a violent fever , you would not have despised him half so much .
Confess , Marianne , is not there something interesting to you in the flushed cheek , hollow eye , and quick pulse of a fever ? ''
Soon after this , upon Elinor 's leaving the room , '' Mamma , '' said Marianne , `` I have an alarm on the subject of illness which I can not conceal from you .
I am sure Edward Ferrars is not well .
We have now been here almost a fortnight , and yet he does not come .
Nothing but real indisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay .
What else can detain him at Norland ? ''
`` Had you any idea of his coming so soon ? ''
said Mrs .
Dashwood .
`` I had none .
On the contrary , if I have felt any anxiety at all on the subject , it has been in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want of pleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation , when I talked of his coming to Barton .
Does Elinor expect him already ? ''
`` I have never mentioned it to her , but of course she must . ''
`` I rather think you are mistaken , for when I was talking to her yesterday of getting a new grate for the spare bedchamber , she observed that there was no immediate hurry for it , as it was not likely that the room would be wanted for some time . ''
`` How strange this is !
what can be the meaning of it !
But the whole of their behaviour to each other has been unaccountable !
How cold , how composed were their last adieus !
How languid their conversation the last evening of their being together !
In Edward 's farewell there was no distinction between Elinor and me : it was the good wishes of an affectionate brother to both .
Twice did I leave them purposely together in the course of the last morning , and each time did he most unaccountably follow me out of the room .
And Elinor , in quitting Norland and Edward , cried not as I did .
Even now her self-command is invariable .
When is she dejected or melancholy ?
When does she try to avoid society , or appear restless and dissatisfied in it ? ''
CHAPTER 9 The Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerable comfort to themselves .
The house and the garden , with all the objects surrounding them , were now become familiar , and the ordinary pursuits which had given to Norland half its charms were engaged in again with far greater enjoyment than Norland had been able to afford , since the loss of their father .
Sir John Middleton , who called on them every day for the first fortnight , and who was not in the habit of seeing much occupation at home , could not conceal his amazement on finding them always employed .
Their visitors , except those from Barton Park , were not many ; for , in spite of Sir John 's urgent entreaties that they would mix more in the neighbourhood , and repeated assurances of his carriage being always at their service , the independence of Mrs .
Dashwood 's spirit overcame the wish of society for her children ; and she was resolute in declining to visit any family beyond the distance of a walk .
There were but few who could be so classed ; and it was not all of them that were attainable .
About a mile and a half from the cottage , along the narrow winding valley of Allenham , which issued from that of Barton , as formerly described , the girls had , in one of their earliest walks , discovered an ancient respectable looking mansion which , by reminding them a little of Norland , interested their imagination and made them wish to be better acquainted with it .
But they learnt , on enquiry , that its possessor , an elderly lady of very good character , was unfortunately too infirm to mix with the world , and never stirred from home .
The whole country about them abounded in beautiful walks .
The high downs which invited them from almost every window of the cottage to seek the exquisite enjoyment of air on their summits , were a happy alternative when the dirt of the valleys beneath shut up their superior beauties ; and towards one of these hills did Marianne and Margaret one memorable morning direct their steps , attracted by the partial sunshine of a showery sky , and unable longer to bear the confinement which the settled rain of the two preceding days had occasioned .
The weather was not tempting enough to draw the two others from their pencil and their book , in spite of Marianne 's declaration that the day would be lastingly fair , and that every threatening cloud would be drawn off from their hills ; and the two girls set off together .
They gaily ascended the downs , rejoicing in their own penetration at every glimpse of blue sky ; and when they caught in their faces the animating gales of a high south-westerly wind , they pitied the fears which had prevented their mother and Elinor from sharing such delightful sensations .
`` Is there a felicity in the world , '' said Marianne , '' superior to this ? -- Margaret , we will walk here at least two hours . ''
Margaret agreed , and they pursued their way against the wind , resisting it with laughing delight for about twenty minutes longer , when suddenly the clouds united over their heads , and a driving rain set full in their face. -- Chagrined and surprised , they were obliged , though unwillingly , to turn back , for no shelter was nearer than their own house .
One consolation however remained for them , to which the exigence of the moment gave more than usual propriety ; it was that of running with all possible speed down the steep side of the hill which led immediately to their garden gate .
They set off .
Marianne had at first the advantage , but a false step brought her suddenly to the ground ; and Margaret , unable to stop herself to assist her , was involuntarily hurried along , and reached the bottom in safety .
A gentleman carrying a gun , with two pointers playing round him , was passing up the hill and within a few yards of Marianne , when her accident happened .
He put down his gun and ran to her assistance .
She had raised herself from the ground , but her foot had been twisted in her fall , and she was scarcely able to stand .
The gentleman offered his services ; and perceiving that her modesty declined what her situation rendered necessary , took her up in his arms without farther delay , and carried her down the hill .
Then passing through the garden , the gate of which had been left open by Margaret , he bore her directly into the house , whither Margaret was just arrived , and quitted not his hold till he had seated her in a chair in the parlour .
Elinor and her mother rose up in amazement at their entrance , and while the eyes of both were fixed on him with an evident wonder and a secret admiration which equally sprung from his appearance , he apologized for his intrusion by relating its cause , in a manner so frank and so graceful that his person , which was uncommonly handsome , received additional charms from his voice and expression .
Had he been even old , ugly , and vulgar , the gratitude and kindness of Mrs .
Dashwood would have been secured by any act of attention to her child ; but the influence of youth , beauty , and elegance , gave an interest to the action which came home to her feelings .
She thanked him again and again ; and , with a sweetness of address which always attended her , invited him to be seated .
But this he declined , as he was dirty and wet .
Mrs .
Dashwood then begged to know to whom she was obliged .
His name , he replied , was Willoughby , and his present home was at Allenham , from whence he hoped she would allow him the honour of calling tomorrow to enquire after Miss Dashwood .
The honour was readily granted , and he then departed , to make himself still more interesting , in the midst of a heavy rain .
His manly beauty and more than common gracefulness were instantly the theme of general admiration , and the laugh which his gallantry raised against Marianne received particular spirit from his exterior attractions. -- Marianne herself had seen less of his person that the rest , for the confusion which crimsoned over her face , on his lifting her up , had robbed her of the power of regarding him after their entering the house .
But she had seen enough of him to join in all the admiration of the others , and with an energy which always adorned her praise .
His person and air were equal to what her fancy had ever drawn for the hero of a favourite story ; and in his carrying her into the house with so little previous formality , there was a rapidity of thought which particularly recommended the action to her .
Every circumstance belonging to him was interesting .
His name was good , his residence was in their favourite village , and she soon found out that of all manly dresses a shooting-jacket was the most becoming .
Her imagination was busy , her reflections were pleasant , and the pain of a sprained ankle was disregarded .
Sir John called on them as soon as the next interval of fair weather that morning allowed him to get out of doors ; and Marianne 's accident being related to him , he was eagerly asked whether he knew any gentleman of the name of Willoughby at Allenham .
`` Willoughby ! ''
cried Sir John ; `` what , is HE in the country ?
That is good news however ; I will ride over tomorrow , and ask him to dinner on Thursday . ''
`` You know him then , '' said Mrs .
Dashwood .
`` Know him !
to be sure I do .
Why , he is down here every year . ''
`` And what sort of a young man is he ? ''
`` As good a kind of fellow as ever lived , I assure you .
A very decent shot , and there is not a bolder rider in England . ''
`` And is that all you can say for him ? ''
cried Marianne , indignantly .
`` But what are his manners on more intimate acquaintance ?
What his pursuits , his talents , and genius ? ''
Sir John was rather puzzled .
`` Upon my soul , '' said he , `` I do not know much about him as to all THAT .
But he is a pleasant , good humoured fellow , and has got the nicest little black bitch of a pointer I ever saw .
Was she out with him today ? ''
But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the colour of Mr .
Willoughby 's pointer , than he could describe to her the shades of his mind .
`` But who is he ? ''
said Elinor .
`` Where does he come from ?
Has he a house at Allenham ? ''
On this point Sir John could give more certain intelligence ; and he told them that Mr .
Willoughby had no property of his own in the country ; that he resided there only while he was visiting the old lady at Allenham Court , to whom he was related , and whose possessions he was to inherit ; adding , `` Yes , yes , he is very well worth catching I can tell you , Miss Dashwood ; he has a pretty little estate of his own in Somersetshire besides ; and if I were you , I would not give him up to my younger sister , in spite of all this tumbling down hills .
Miss Marianne must not expect to have all the men to herself .
Brandon will be jealous , if she does not take care . ''
`` I do not believe , '' said Mrs .
Dashwood , with a good humoured smile , `` that Mr .
Willoughby will be incommoded by the attempts of either of MY daughters towards what you call CATCHING him .
It is not an employment to which they have been brought up .
Men are very safe with us , let them be ever so rich .
I am glad to find , however , from what you say , that he is a respectable young man , and one whose acquaintance will not be ineligible . ''
`` He is as good a sort of fellow , I believe , as ever lived , '' repeated Sir John .
`` I remember last Christmas at a little hop at the park , he danced from eight o'clock till four , without once sitting down . ''
`` Did he indeed ? ''
cried Marianne with sparkling eyes , '' and with elegance , with spirit ? ''
`` Yes ; and he was up again at eight to ride to covert . ''
`` That is what I like ; that is what a young man ought to be .
Whatever be his pursuits , his eagerness in them should know no moderation , and leave him no sense of fatigue . ''
`` Aye , aye , I see how it will be , '' said Sir John , `` I see how it will be .
You will be setting your cap at him now , and never think of poor Brandon . ''
`` That is an expression , Sir John , '' said Marianne , warmly , `` which I particularly dislike .
I abhor every common-place phrase by which wit is intended ; and 'setting one 's cap at a man , ' or 'making a conquest , ' are the most odious of all .
Their tendency is gross and illiberal ; and if their construction could ever be deemed clever , time has long ago destroyed all its ingenuity . ''
Sir John did not much understand this reproof ; but he laughed as heartily as if he did , and then replied , '' Ay , you will make conquests enough , I dare say , one way or other .
Poor Brandon !
he is quite smitten already , and he is very well worth setting your cap at , I can tell you , in spite of all this tumbling about and spraining of ankles . ''
CHAPTER 10 Marianne 's preserver , as Margaret , with more elegance than precision , styled Willoughby , called at the cottage early the next morning to make his personal enquiries .
He was received by Mrs .
Dashwood with more than politeness ; with a kindness which Sir John 's account of him and her own gratitude prompted ; and every thing that passed during the visit tended to assure him of the sense , elegance , mutual affection , and domestic comfort of the family to whom accident had now introduced him .
Of their personal charms he had not required a second interview to be convinced .
Miss Dashwood had a delicate complexion , regular features , and a remarkably pretty figure .
Marianne was still handsomer .
Her form , though not so correct as her sister 's , in having the advantage of height , was more striking ; and her face was so lovely , that when in the common cant of praise , she was called a beautiful girl , truth was less violently outraged than usually happens .
Her skin was very brown , but , from its transparency , her complexion was uncommonly brilliant ; her features were all good ; her smile was sweet and attractive ; and in her eyes , which were very dark , there was a life , a spirit , an eagerness , which could hardily be seen without delight .
From Willoughby their expression was at first held back , by the embarrassment which the remembrance of his assistance created .
But when this passed away , when her spirits became collected , when she saw that to the perfect good-breeding of the gentleman , he united frankness and vivacity , and above all , when she heard him declare , that of music and dancing he was passionately fond , she gave him such a look of approbation as secured the largest share of his discourse to herself for the rest of his stay .
It was only necessary to mention any favourite amusement to engage her to talk .
She could not be silent when such points were introduced , and she had neither shyness nor reserve in their discussion .
They speedily discovered that their enjoyment of dancing and music was mutual , and that it arose from a general conformity of judgment in all that related to either .
Encouraged by this to a further examination of his opinions , she proceeded to question him on the subject of books ; her favourite authors were brought forward and dwelt upon with so rapturous a delight , that any young man of five and twenty must have been insensible indeed , not to become an immediate convert to the excellence of such works , however disregarded before .
Their taste was strikingly alike .
The same books , the same passages were idolized by each -- or if any difference appeared , any objection arose , it lasted no longer than till the force of her arguments and the brightness of her eyes could be displayed .
He acquiesced in all her decisions , caught all her enthusiasm ; and long before his visit concluded , they conversed with the familiarity of a long-established acquaintance .
`` Well , Marianne , '' said Elinor , as soon as he had left them , '' for ONE morning I think you have done pretty well .
You have already ascertained Mr .
Willoughby 's opinion in almost every matter of importance .
You know what he thinks of Cowper and Scott ; you are certain of his estimating their beauties as he ought , and you have received every assurance of his admiring Pope no more than is proper .
But how is your acquaintance to be long supported , under such extraordinary despatch of every subject for discourse ?
You will soon have exhausted each favourite topic .
Another meeting will suffice to explain his sentiments on picturesque beauty , and second marriages , and then you can have nothing farther to ask . ''
-- '' Elinor , '' cried Marianne , `` is this fair ?
is this just ?
are my ideas so scanty ?
But I see what you mean .
I have been too much at my ease , too happy , too frank .
I have erred against every common-place notion of decorum ; I have been open and sincere where I ought to have been reserved , spiritless , dull , and deceitful -- had I talked only of the weather and the roads , and had I spoken only once in ten minutes , this reproach would have been spared . ''
`` My love , '' said her mother , `` you must not be offended with Elinor -- she was only in jest .
I should scold her myself , if she were capable of wishing to check the delight of your conversation with our new friend . ''
-- Marianne was softened in a moment .
Willoughby , on his side , gave every proof of his pleasure in their acquaintance , which an evident wish of improving it could offer .
He came to them every day .
To enquire after Marianne was at first his excuse ; but the encouragement of his reception , to which every day gave greater kindness , made such an excuse unnecessary before it had ceased to be possible , by Marianne 's perfect recovery .
She was confined for some days to the house ; but never had any confinement been less irksome .
Willoughby was a young man of good abilities , quick imagination , lively spirits , and open , affectionate manners .
He was exactly formed to engage Marianne 's heart , for with all this , he joined not only a captivating person , but a natural ardour of mind which was now roused and increased by the example of her own , and which recommended him to her affection beyond every thing else .
His society became gradually her most exquisite enjoyment .
They read , they talked , they sang together ; his musical talents were considerable ; and he read with all the sensibility and spirit which Edward had unfortunately wanted .
In Mrs .
Dashwood 's estimation he was as faultless as in Marianne 's ; and Elinor saw nothing to censure in him but a propensity , in which he strongly resembled and peculiarly delighted her sister , of saying too much what he thought on every occasion , without attention to persons or circumstances .
In hastily forming and giving his opinion of other people , in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment of undivided attention where his heart was engaged , and in slighting too easily the forms of worldly propriety , he displayed a want of caution which Elinor could not approve , in spite of all that he and Marianne could say in its support .
Marianne began now to perceive that the desperation which had seized her at sixteen and a half , of ever seeing a man who could satisfy her ideas of perfection , had been rash and unjustifiable .
Willoughby was all that her fancy had delineated in that unhappy hour and in every brighter period , as capable of attaching her ; and his behaviour declared his wishes to be in that respect as earnest , as his abilities were strong .
Her mother too , in whose mind not one speculative thought of their marriage had been raised , by his prospect of riches , was led before the end of a week to hope and expect it ; and secretly to congratulate herself on having gained two such sons-in-law as Edward and Willoughby .
Colonel Brandon 's partiality for Marianne , which had so early been discovered by his friends , now first became perceptible to Elinor , when it ceased to be noticed by them .
Their attention and wit were drawn off to his more fortunate rival ; and the raillery which the other had incurred before any partiality arose , was removed when his feelings began really to call for the ridicule so justly annexed to sensibility .
Elinor was obliged , though unwillingly , to believe that the sentiments which Mrs .
Jennings had assigned him for her own satisfaction , were now actually excited by her sister ; and that however a general resemblance of disposition between the parties might forward the affection of Mr .
Willoughby , an equally striking opposition of character was no hindrance to the regard of Colonel Brandon .
She saw it with concern ; for what could a silent man of five and thirty hope , when opposed to a very lively one of five and twenty ?
and as she could not even wish him successful , she heartily wished him indifferent .
She liked him -- in spite of his gravity and reserve , she beheld in him an object of interest .
His manners , though serious , were mild ; and his reserve appeared rather the result of some oppression of spirits than of any natural gloominess of temper .
Sir John had dropped hints of past injuries and disappointments , which justified her belief of his being an unfortunate man , and she regarded him with respect and compassion .
Perhaps she pitied and esteemed him the more because he was slighted by Willoughby and Marianne , who , prejudiced against him for being neither lively nor young , seemed resolved to undervalue his merits .
`` Brandon is just the kind of man , '' said Willoughby one day , when they were talking of him together , '' whom every body speaks well of , and nobody cares about ; whom all are delighted to see , and nobody remembers to talk to . ''
`` That is exactly what I think of him , '' cried Marianne .
`` Do not boast of it , however , '' said Elinor , `` for it is injustice in both of you .
He is highly esteemed by all the family at the park , and I never see him myself without taking pains to converse with him . ''
`` That he is patronised by YOU , '' replied Willoughby , '' is certainly in his favour ; but as for the esteem of the others , it is a reproach in itself .
Who would submit to the indignity of being approved by such a woman as Lady Middleton and Mrs .
Jennings , that could command the indifference of any body else ? ''
`` But perhaps the abuse of such people as yourself and Marianne will make amends for the regard of Lady Middleton and her mother .
If their praise is censure , your censure may be praise , for they are not more undiscerning , than you are prejudiced and unjust . ''
`` In defence of your protege you can even be saucy . ''
`` My protege , as you call him , is a sensible man ; and sense will always have attractions for me .
Yes , Marianne , even in a man between thirty and forty .
He has seen a great deal of the world ; has been abroad , has read , and has a thinking mind .
I have found him capable of giving me much information on various subjects ; and he has always answered my inquiries with readiness of good-breeding and good nature . ''
`` That is to say , '' cried Marianne contemptuously , '' he has told you , that in the East Indies the climate is hot , and the mosquitoes are troublesome . ''
`` He WOULD have told me so , I doubt not , had I made any such inquiries , but they happened to be points on which I had been previously informed . ''
`` Perhaps , '' said Willoughby , `` his observations may have extended to the existence of nabobs , gold mohrs , and palanquins . ''
`` I may venture to say that HIS observations have stretched much further than your candour .
But why should you dislike him ? ''
`` I do not dislike him .
I consider him , on the contrary , as a very respectable man , who has every body 's good word , and nobody 's notice ; who , has more money than he can spend , more time than he knows how to employ , and two new coats every year . ''
`` Add to which , '' cried Marianne , `` that he has neither genius , taste , nor spirit .
That his understanding has no brilliancy , his feelings no ardour , and his voice no expression . ''
`` You decide on his imperfections so much in the mass , '' replied Elinor , `` and so much on the strength of your own imagination , that the commendation I am able to give of him is comparatively cold and insipid .
I can only pronounce him to be a sensible man , well-bred , well-informed , of gentle address , and , I believe , possessing an amiable heart . ''
`` Miss Dashwood , '' cried Willoughby , `` you are now using me unkindly .
You are endeavouring to disarm me by reason , and to convince me against my will .
But it will not do .
You shall find me as stubborn as you can be artful .
I have three unanswerable reasons for disliking Colonel Brandon ; he threatened me with rain when I wanted it to be fine ; he has found fault with the hanging of my curricle , and I can not persuade him to buy my brown mare .
If it will be any satisfaction to you , however , to be told , that I believe his character to be in other respects irreproachable , I am ready to confess it .
And in return for an acknowledgment , which must give me some pain , you can not deny me the privilege of disliking him as much as ever . ''
CHAPTER 11 Little had Mrs .
Dashwood or her daughters imagined when they first came into Devonshire , that so many engagements would arise to occupy their time as shortly presented themselves , or that they should have such frequent invitations and such constant visitors as to leave them little leisure for serious employment .
Yet such was the case .
When Marianne was recovered , the schemes of amusement at home and abroad , which Sir John had been previously forming , were put into execution .
The private balls at the park then began ; and parties on the water were made and accomplished as often as a showery October would allow .
In every meeting of the kind Willoughby was included ; and the ease and familiarity which naturally attended these parties were exactly calculated to give increasing intimacy to his acquaintance with the Dashwoods , to afford him opportunity of witnessing the excellencies of Marianne , of marking his animated admiration of her , and of receiving , in her behaviour to himself , the most pointed assurance of her affection .
Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment .
She only wished that it were less openly shewn ; and once or twice did venture to suggest the propriety of some self-command to Marianne .
But Marianne abhorred all concealment where no real disgrace could attend unreserve ; and to aim at the restraint of sentiments which were not in themselves illaudable , appeared to her not merely an unnecessary effort , but a disgraceful subjection of reason to common-place and mistaken notions .
Willoughby thought the same ; and their behaviour at all times , was an illustration of their opinions .
When he was present she had no eyes for any one else .
Every thing he did , was right .
Every thing he said , was clever .
If their evenings at the park were concluded with cards , he cheated himself and all the rest of the party to get her a good hand .
If dancing formed the amusement of the night , they were partners for half the time ; and when obliged to separate for a couple of dances , were careful to stand together and scarcely spoke a word to any body else .
Such conduct made them of course most exceedingly laughed at ; but ridicule could not shame , and seemed hardly to provoke them .
Mrs .
Dashwood entered into all their feelings with a warmth which left her no inclination for checking this excessive display of them .
To her it was but the natural consequence of a strong affection in a young and ardent mind .
This was the season of happiness to Marianne .
Her heart was devoted to Willoughby , and the fond attachment to Norland , which she brought with her from Sussex , was more likely to be softened than she had thought it possible before , by the charms which his society bestowed on her present home .
Elinor 's happiness was not so great .
Her heart was not so much at ease , nor her satisfaction in their amusements so pure .
They afforded her no companion that could make amends for what she had left behind , nor that could teach her to think of Norland with less regret than ever .
Neither Lady Middleton nor Mrs .
Jennings could supply to her the conversation she missed ; although the latter was an everlasting talker , and from the first had regarded her with a kindness which ensured her a large share of her discourse .
She had already repeated her own history to Elinor three or four times ; and had Elinor 's memory been equal to her means of improvement , she might have known very early in their acquaintance all the particulars of Mr .
Jenning 's last illness , and what he said to his wife a few minutes before he died .
Lady Middleton was more agreeable than her mother only in being more silent .
Elinor needed little observation to perceive that her reserve was a mere calmness of manner with which sense had nothing to do .
Towards her husband and mother she was the same as to them ; and intimacy was therefore neither to be looked for nor desired .
She had nothing to say one day that she had not said the day before .
Her insipidity was invariable , for even her spirits were always the same ; and though she did not oppose the parties arranged by her husband , provided every thing were conducted in style and her two eldest children attended her , she never appeared to receive more enjoyment from them than she might have experienced in sitting at home ; -- and so little did her presence add to the pleasure of the others , by any share in their conversation , that they were sometimes only reminded of her being amongst them by her solicitude about her troublesome boys .
In Colonel Brandon alone , of all her new acquaintance , did Elinor find a person who could in any degree claim the respect of abilities , excite the interest of friendship , or give pleasure as a companion .
Willoughby was out of the question .
Her admiration and regard , even her sisterly regard , was all his own ; but he was a lover ; his attentions were wholly Marianne 's , and a far less agreeable man might have been more generally pleasing .
Colonel Brandon , unfortunately for himself , had no such encouragement to think only of Marianne , and in conversing with Elinor he found the greatest consolation for the indifference of her sister .
Elinor 's compassion for him increased , as she had reason to suspect that the misery of disappointed love had already been known to him .
This suspicion was given by some words which accidently dropped from him one evening at the park , when they were sitting down together by mutual consent , while the others were dancing .
His eyes were fixed on Marianne , and , after a silence of some minutes , he said , with a faint smile , `` Your sister , I understand , does not approve of second attachments . ''
`` No , '' replied Elinor , `` her opinions are all romantic . ''
`` Or rather , as I believe , she considers them impossible to exist . ''
`` I believe she does .
But how she contrives it without reflecting on the character of her own father , who had himself two wives , I know not .
A few years however will settle her opinions on the reasonable basis of common sense and observation ; and then they may be more easy to define and to justify than they now are , by any body but herself . ''
`` This will probably be the case , '' he replied ; '' and yet there is something so amiable in the prejudices of a young mind , that one is sorry to see them give way to the reception of more general opinions . ''
`` I can not agree with you there , '' said Elinor .
`` There are inconveniences attending such feelings as Marianne 's , which all the charms of enthusiasm and ignorance of the world can not atone for .
Her systems have all the unfortunate tendency of setting propriety at nought ; and a better acquaintance with the world is what I look forward to as her greatest possible advantage . ''
After a short pause he resumed the conversation by saying , -- '' Does your sister make no distinction in her objections against a second attachment ?
or is it equally criminal in every body ?
Are those who have been disappointed in their first choice , whether from the inconstancy of its object , or the perverseness of circumstances , to be equally indifferent during the rest of their lives ? ''
`` Upon my word , I am not acquainted with the minutiae of her principles .
I only know that I never yet heard her admit any instance of a second attachment 's being pardonable . ''
`` This , '' said he , `` can not hold ; but a change , a total change of sentiments -- No , no , do not desire it ; for when the romantic refinements of a young mind are obliged to give way , how frequently are they succeeded by such opinions as are but too common , and too dangerous !
I speak from experience .
I once knew a lady who in temper and mind greatly resembled your sister , who thought and judged like her , but who from an inforced change -- from a series of unfortunate circumstances '' -- Here he stopt suddenly ; appeared to think that he had said too much , and by his countenance gave rise to conjectures , which might not otherwise have entered Elinor 's head .
The lady would probably have passed without suspicion , had he not convinced Miss Dashwood that what concerned her ought not to escape his lips .
As it was , it required but a slight effort of fancy to connect his emotion with the tender recollection of past regard .
Elinor attempted no more .
But Marianne , in her place , would not have done so little .
The whole story would have been speedily formed under her active imagination ; and every thing established in the most melancholy order of disastrous love .
CHAPTER 12 As Elinor and Marianne were walking together the next morning the latter communicated a piece of news to her sister , which in spite of all that she knew before of Marianne 's imprudence and want of thought , surprised her by its extravagant testimony of both .
Marianne told her , with the greatest delight , that Willoughby had given her a horse , one that he had bred himself on his estate in Somersetshire , and which was exactly calculated to carry a woman .
Without considering that it was not in her mother 's plan to keep any horse , that if she were to alter her resolution in favour of this gift , she must buy another for the servant , and keep a servant to ride it , and after all , build a stable to receive them , she had accepted the present without hesitation , and told her sister of it in raptures .
`` He intends to send his groom into Somersetshire immediately for it , '' she added , `` and when it arrives we will ride every day .
You shall share its use with me .
Imagine to yourself , my dear Elinor , the delight of a gallop on some of these downs . ''
Most unwilling was she to awaken from such a dream of felicity to comprehend all the unhappy truths which attended the affair ; and for some time she refused to submit to them .
As to an additional servant , the expense would be a trifle ; Mamma she was sure would never object to it ; and any horse would do for HIM ; he might always get one at the park ; as to a stable , the merest shed would be sufficient .
Elinor then ventured to doubt the propriety of her receiving such a present from a man so little , or at least so lately known to her .
This was too much .
`` You are mistaken , Elinor , '' said she warmly , '' in supposing I know very little of Willoughby .
I have not known him long indeed , but I am much better acquainted with him , than I am with any other creature in the world , except yourself and mama .
It is not time or opportunity that is to determine intimacy ; -- it is disposition alone .
Seven years would be insufficient to make some people acquainted with each other , and seven days are more than enough for others .
I should hold myself guilty of greater impropriety in accepting a horse from my brother , than from Willoughby .
Of John I know very little , though we have lived together for years ; but of Willoughby my judgment has long been formed . ''
Elinor thought it wisest to touch that point no more .
She knew her sister 's temper .
Opposition on so tender a subject would only attach her the more to her own opinion .
But by an appeal to her affection for her mother , by representing the inconveniences which that indulgent mother must draw on herself , if ( as would probably be the case ) she consented to this increase of establishment , Marianne was shortly subdued ; and she promised not to tempt her mother to such imprudent kindness by mentioning the offer , and to tell Willoughby when she saw him next , that it must be declined .
She was faithful to her word ; and when Willoughby called at the cottage , the same day , Elinor heard her express her disappointment to him in a low voice , on being obliged to forego the acceptance of his present .
The reasons for this alteration were at the same time related , and they were such as to make further entreaty on his side impossible .
His concern however was very apparent ; and after expressing it with earnestness , he added , in the same low voice , -- '' But , Marianne , the horse is still yours , though you can not use it now .
I shall keep it only till you can claim it .
When you leave Barton to form your own establishment in a more lasting home , Queen Mab shall receive you . ''
This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood ; and in the whole of the sentence , in his manner of pronouncing it , and in his addressing her sister by her Christian name alone , she instantly saw an intimacy so decided , a meaning so direct , as marked a perfect agreement between them .
From that moment she doubted not of their being engaged to each other ; and the belief of it created no other surprise than that she , or any of their friends , should be left by tempers so frank , to discover it by accident .
Margaret related something to her the next day , which placed this matter in a still clearer light .
Willoughby had spent the preceding evening with them , and Margaret , by being left some time in the parlour with only him and Marianne , had had opportunity for observations , which , with a most important face , she communicated to her eldest sister , when they were next by themselves .
`` Oh , Elinor ! ''
she cried , `` I have such a secret to tell you about Marianne .
I am sure she will be married to Mr .
Willoughby very soon . ''
`` You have said so , '' replied Elinor , `` almost every day since they first met on High-church Down ; and they had not known each other a week , I believe , before you were certain that Marianne wore his picture round her neck ; but it turned out to be only the miniature of our great uncle . ''
`` But indeed this is quite another thing .
I am sure they will be married very soon , for he has got a lock of her hair . ''
`` Take care , Margaret .
It may be only the hair of some great uncle of HIS . ''
`` But , indeed , Elinor , it is Marianne 's .
I am almost sure it is , for I saw him cut it off .
Last night after tea , when you and mama went out of the room , they were whispering and talking together as fast as could be , and he seemed to be begging something of her , and presently he took up her scissors and cut off a long lock of her hair , for it was all tumbled down her back ; and he kissed it , and folded it up in a piece of white paper ; and put it into his pocket-book . ''
For such particulars , stated on such authority , Elinor could not withhold her credit ; nor was she disposed to it , for the circumstance was in perfect unison with what she had heard and seen herself .
Margaret 's sagacity was not always displayed in a way so satisfactory to her sister .
When Mrs .
Jennings attacked her one evening at the park , to give the name of the young man who was Elinor 's particular favourite , which had been long a matter of great curiosity to her , Margaret answered by looking at her sister , and saying , '' I must not tell , may I , Elinor ? ''
This of course made every body laugh ; and Elinor tried to laugh too .
But the effort was painful .
She was convinced that Margaret had fixed on a person whose name she could not bear with composure to become a standing joke with Mrs .
Jennings .
Marianne felt for her most sincerely ; but she did more harm than good to the cause , by turning very red and saying in an angry manner to Margaret , '' Remember that whatever your conjectures may be , you have no right to repeat them . ''
`` I never had any conjectures about it , '' replied Margaret ; '' it was you who told me of it yourself . ''
This increased the mirth of the company , and Margaret was eagerly pressed to say something more .
`` Oh !
pray , Miss Margaret , let us know all about it , '' said Mrs .
Jennings .
`` What is the gentleman 's name ? ''
`` I must not tell , ma'am .
But I know very well what it is ; and I know where he is too . ''
`` Yes , yes , we can guess where he is ; at his own house at Norland to be sure .
He is the curate of the parish I dare say . ''
`` No , THAT he is not .
He is of no profession at all . ''
`` Margaret , '' said Marianne with great warmth , '' you know that all this is an invention of your own , and that there is no such person in existence . ''
`` Well , then , he is lately dead , Marianne , for I am sure there was such a man once , and his name begins with an F . ''
Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for observing , at this moment , `` that it rained very hard , '' though she believed the interruption to proceed less from any attention to her , than from her ladyship 's great dislike of all such inelegant subjects of raillery as delighted her husband and mother .
The idea however started by her , was immediately pursued by Colonel Brandon , who was on every occasion mindful of the feelings of others ; and much was said on the subject of rain by both of them .
Willoughby opened the piano-forte , and asked Marianne to sit down to it ; and thus amidst the various endeavours of different people to quit the topic , it fell to the ground .
But not so easily did Elinor recover from the alarm into which it had thrown her .
A party was formed this evening for going on the following day to see a very fine place about twelve miles from Barton , belonging to a brother-in-law of Colonel Brandon , without whose interest it could not be seen , as the proprietor , who was then abroad , had left strict orders on that head .
The grounds were declared to be highly beautiful , and Sir John , who was particularly warm in their praise , might be allowed to be a tolerable judge , for he had formed parties to visit them , at least , twice every summer for the last ten years .
They contained a noble piece of water ; a sail on which was to a form a great part of the morning 's amusement ; cold provisions were to be taken , open carriages only to be employed , and every thing conducted in the usual style of a complete party of pleasure .
To some few of the company it appeared rather a bold undertaking , considering the time of year , and that it had rained every day for the last fortnight ; -- and Mrs .
Dashwood , who had already a cold , was persuaded by Elinor to stay at home .
CHAPTER 13 Their intended excursion to Whitwell turned out very different from what Elinor had expected .
She was prepared to be wet through , fatigued , and frightened ; but the event was still more unfortunate , for they did not go at all .
By ten o'clock the whole party was assembled at the park , where they were to breakfast .
The morning was rather favourable , though it had rained all night , as the clouds were then dispersing across the sky , and the sun frequently appeared .
They were all in high spirits and good humour , eager to be happy , and determined to submit to the greatest inconveniences and hardships rather than be otherwise .
While they were at breakfast the letters were brought in .
Among the rest there was one for Colonel Brandon ; -- he took it , looked at the direction , changed colour , and immediately left the room .
`` What is the matter with Brandon ? ''
said Sir John .
Nobody could tell .
`` I hope he has had no bad news , '' said Lady Middleton .
`` It must be something extraordinary that could make Colonel Brandon leave my breakfast table so suddenly . ''
In about five minutes he returned .
`` No bad news , Colonel , I hope ; '' said Mrs .
Jennings , as soon as he entered the room .
`` None at all , ma'am , I thank you . ''
`` Was it from Avignon ?
I hope it is not to say that your sister is worse . ''
`` No , ma'am .
It came from town , and is merely a letter of business . ''
`` But how came the hand to discompose you so much , if it was only a letter of business ?
Come , come , this wo n't do , Colonel ; so let us hear the truth of it . ''
`` My dear madam , '' said Lady Middleton , `` recollect what you are saying . ''
`` Perhaps it is to tell you that your cousin Fanny is married ? ''
said Mrs .
Jennings , without attending to her daughter 's reproof .
`` No , indeed , it is not . ''
`` Well , then , I know who it is from , Colonel .
And I hope she is well . ''
`` Whom do you mean , ma'am ? ''
said he , colouring a little .
`` Oh !
you know who I mean . ''
`` I am particularly sorry , ma'am , '' said he , addressing Lady Middleton , `` that I should receive this letter today , for it is on business which requires my immediate attendance in town . ''
`` In town ! ''
cried Mrs .
Jennings .
`` What can you have to do in town at this time of year ? ''
`` My own loss is great , '' be continued , `` in being obliged to leave so agreeable a party ; but I am the more concerned , as I fear my presence is necessary to gain your admittance at Whitwell . ''
What a blow upon them all was this !
`` But if you write a note to the housekeeper , Mr .
Brandon , '' said Marianne , eagerly , `` will it not be sufficient ? ''
He shook his head .
`` We must go , '' said Sir John. -- '' It shall not be put off when we are so near it .
You can not go to town till tomorrow , Brandon , that is all . ''
`` I wish it could be so easily settled .
But it is not in my power to delay my journey for one day ! ''
`` If you would but let us know what your business is , '' said Mrs .
Jennings , `` we might see whether it could be put off or not . ''
`` You would not be six hours later , '' said Willoughby , '' if you were to defer your journey till our return . ''
`` I can not afford to lose ONE hour . ''
-- Elinor then heard Willoughby say , in a low voice to Marianne , '' There are some people who can not bear a party of pleasure .
Brandon is one of them .
He was afraid of catching cold I dare say , and invented this trick for getting out of it .
I would lay fifty guineas the letter was of his own writing . ''
`` I have no doubt of it , '' replied Marianne .
`` There is no persuading you to change your mind , Brandon , I know of old , '' said Sir John , `` when once you are determined on anything .
But , however , I hope you will think better of it .
Consider , here are the two Miss Careys come over from Newton , the three Miss Dashwoods walked up from the cottage , and Mr .
Willoughby got up two hours before his usual time , on purpose to go to Whitwell . ''
Colonel Brandon again repeated his sorrow at being the cause of disappointing the party ; but at the same time declared it to be unavoidable .
`` Well , then , when will you come back again ? ''
`` I hope we shall see you at Barton , '' added her ladyship , '' as soon as you can conveniently leave town ; and we must put off the party to Whitwell till you return . ''
`` You are very obliging .
But it is so uncertain , when I may have it in my power to return , that I dare not engage for it at all . ''
`` Oh !
he must and shall come back , '' cried Sir John .
`` If he is not here by the end of the week , I shall go after him . ''
`` Ay , so do , Sir John , '' cried Mrs .
Jennings , `` and then perhaps you may find out what his business is . ''
`` I do not want to pry into other men 's concerns .
I suppose it is something he is ashamed of . ''
Colonel Brandon 's horses were announced .
`` You do not go to town on horseback , do you ? ''
added Sir John .
`` No .
Only to Honiton .
I shall then go post . ''
`` Well , as you are resolved to go , I wish you a good journey .
But you had better change your mind . ''
`` I assure you it is not in my power . ''
He then took leave of the whole party .
`` Is there no chance of my seeing you and your sisters in town this winter , Miss Dashwood ? ''
`` I am afraid , none at all . ''
`` Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time than I should wish to do . ''
To Marianne , he merely bowed and said nothing .
`` Come Colonel , '' said Mrs .
Jennings , `` before you go , do let us know what you are going about . ''
He wished her a good morning , and , attended by Sir John , left the room .
The complaints and lamentations which politeness had hitherto restrained , now burst forth universally ; and they all agreed again and again how provoking it was to be so disappointed .
`` I can guess what his business is , however , '' said Mrs .
Jennings exultingly .
`` Can you , ma'am ? ''
said almost every body .
`` Yes ; it is about Miss Williams , I am sure . ''
`` And who is Miss Williams ? ''
asked Marianne .
`` What !
do not you know who Miss Williams is ?
I am sure you must have heard of her before .
She is a relation of the Colonel 's , my dear ; a very near relation .
We will not say how near , for fear of shocking the young ladies . ''
Then , lowering her voice a little , she said to Elinor , '' She is his natural daughter . ''
`` Indeed ! ''
`` Oh , yes ; and as like him as she can stare .
I dare say the Colonel will leave her all his fortune . ''
When Sir John returned , he joined most heartily in the general regret on so unfortunate an event ; concluding however by observing , that as they were all got together , they must do something by way of being happy ; and after some consultation it was agreed , that although happiness could only be enjoyed at Whitwell , they might procure a tolerable composure of mind by driving about the country .
The carriages were then ordered ; Willoughby 's was first , and Marianne never looked happier than when she got into it .
He drove through the park very fast , and they were soon out of sight ; and nothing more of them was seen till their return , which did not happen till after the return of all the rest .
They both seemed delighted with their drive ; but said only in general terms that they had kept in the lanes , while the others went on the downs .
It was settled that there should be a dance in the evening , and that every body should be extremely merry all day long .
Some more of the Careys came to dinner , and they had the pleasure of sitting down nearly twenty to table , which Sir John observed with great contentment .
Willoughby took his usual place between the two elder Miss Dashwoods .
Mrs .
Jennings sat on Elinor 's right hand ; and they had not been long seated , before she leant behind her and Willoughby , and said to Marianne , loud enough for them both to hear , '' I have found you out in spite of all your tricks .
I know where you spent the morning . ''
Marianne coloured , and replied very hastily , '' Where , pray ? ''
-- '' Did not you know , '' said Willoughby , `` that we had been out in my curricle ? ''
`` Yes , yes , Mr .
Impudence , I know that very well , and I was determined to find out WHERE you had been to. -- I hope you like your house , Miss Marianne .
It is a very large one , I know ; and when I come to see you , I hope you will have new-furnished it , for it wanted it very much when I was there six years ago . ''
Marianne turned away in great confusion .
Mrs .
Jennings laughed heartily ; and Elinor found that in her resolution to know where they had been , she had actually made her own woman enquire of Mr .
Willoughby 's groom ; and that she had by that method been informed that they had gone to Allenham , and spent a considerable time there in walking about the garden and going all over the house .
Elinor could hardly believe this to be true , as it seemed very unlikely that Willoughby should propose , or Marianne consent , to enter the house while Mrs .
Smith was in it , with whom Marianne had not the smallest acquaintance .
As soon as they left the dining-room , Elinor enquired of her about it ; and great was her surprise when she found that every circumstance related by Mrs .
Jennings was perfectly true .
Marianne was quite angry with her for doubting it .
`` Why should you imagine , Elinor , that we did not go there , or that we did not see the house ?
Is not it what you have often wished to do yourself ? ''
`` Yes , Marianne , but I would not go while Mrs .
Smith was there , and with no other companion than Mr .
Willoughby . ''
`` Mr .
Willoughby however is the only person who can have a right to shew that house ; and as he went in an open carriage , it was impossible to have any other companion .
I never spent a pleasanter morning in my life . ''
`` I am afraid , '' replied Elinor , `` that the pleasantness of an employment does not always evince its propriety . ''
`` On the contrary , nothing can be a stronger proof of it , Elinor ; for if there had been any real impropriety in what I did , I should have been sensible of it at the time , for we always know when we are acting wrong , and with such a conviction I could have had no pleasure . ''
`` But , my dear Marianne , as it has already exposed you to some very impertinent remarks , do you not now begin to doubt the discretion of your own conduct ? ''
`` If the impertinent remarks of Mrs .
Jennings are to be the proof of impropriety in conduct , we are all offending every moment of our lives .
I value not her censure any more than I should do her commendation .
I am not sensible of having done anything wrong in walking over Mrs .
Smith 's grounds , or in seeing her house .
They will one day be Mr .
Willoughby 's , and -- '' '' If they were one day to be your own , Marianne , you would not be justified in what you have done . ''
She blushed at this hint ; but it was even visibly gratifying to her ; and after a ten minutes ' interval of earnest thought , she came to her sister again , and said with great good humour , `` Perhaps , Elinor , it WAS rather ill-judged in me to go to Allenham ; but Mr .
Willoughby wanted particularly to shew me the place ; and it is a charming house , I assure you. -- There is one remarkably pretty sitting room up stairs ; of a nice comfortable size for constant use , and with modern furniture it would be delightful .
It is a corner room , and has windows on two sides .
On one side you look across the bowling-green , behind the house , to a beautiful hanging wood , and on the other you have a view of the church and village , and , beyond them , of those fine bold hills that we have so often admired .
I did not see it to advantage , for nothing could be more forlorn than the furniture , -- but if it were newly fitted up -- a couple of hundred pounds , Willoughby says , would make it one of the pleasantest summer-rooms in England . ''
Could Elinor have listened to her without interruption from the others , she would have described every room in the house with equal delight .
CHAPTER 14 The sudden termination of Colonel Brandon 's visit at the park , with his steadiness in concealing its cause , filled the mind , and raised the wonder of Mrs .
Jennings for two or three days ; she was a great wonderer , as every one must be who takes a very lively interest in all the comings and goings of all their acquaintance .
She wondered , with little intermission what could be the reason of it ; was sure there must be some bad news , and thought over every kind of distress that could have befallen him , with a fixed determination that he should not escape them all .
`` Something very melancholy must be the matter , I am sure , '' said she .
`` I could see it in his face .
Poor man !
I am afraid his circumstances may be bad .
The estate at Delaford was never reckoned more than two thousand a year , and his brother left everything sadly involved .
I do think he must have been sent for about money matters , for what else can it be ?
I wonder whether it is so .
I would give anything to know the truth of it .
Perhaps it is about Miss Williams and , by the bye , I dare say it is , because he looked so conscious when I mentioned her .
May be she is ill in town ; nothing in the world more likely , for I have a notion she is always rather sickly .
I would lay any wager it is about Miss Williams .
It is not so very likely he should be distressed in his circumstances NOW , for he is a very prudent man , and to be sure must have cleared the estate by this time .
I wonder what it can be !
May be his sister is worse at Avignon , and has sent for him over .
His setting off in such a hurry seems very like it .
Well , I wish him out of all his trouble with all my heart , and a good wife into the bargain . ''
So wondered , so talked Mrs .
Jennings .
Her opinion varying with every fresh conjecture , and all seeming equally probable as they arose .
Elinor , though she felt really interested in the welfare of Colonel Brandon , could not bestow all the wonder on his going so suddenly away , which Mrs .
Jennings was desirous of her feeling ; for besides that the circumstance did not in her opinion justify such lasting amazement or variety of speculation , her wonder was otherwise disposed of .
It was engrossed by the extraordinary silence of her sister and Willoughby on the subject , which they must know to be peculiarly interesting to them all .
As this silence continued , every day made it appear more strange and more incompatible with the disposition of both .
Why they should not openly acknowledge to her mother and herself , what their constant behaviour to each other declared to have taken place , Elinor could not imagine .
She could easily conceive that marriage might not be immediately in their power ; for though Willoughby was independent , there was no reason to believe him rich .
His estate had been rated by Sir John at about six or seven hundred a year ; but he lived at an expense to which that income could hardly be equal , and he had himself often complained of his poverty .
But for this strange kind of secrecy maintained by them relative to their engagement , which in fact concealed nothing at all , she could not account ; and it was so wholly contradictory to their general opinions and practice , that a doubt sometimes entered her mind of their being really engaged , and this doubt was enough to prevent her making any inquiry of Marianne .
Nothing could be more expressive of attachment to them all , than Willoughby 's behaviour .
To Marianne it had all the distinguishing tenderness which a lover's heart could give , and to the rest of the family it was the affectionate attention of a son and a brother .
The cottage seemed to be considered and loved by him as his home ; many more of his hours were spent there than at Allenham ; and if no general engagement collected them at the park , the exercise which called him out in the morning was almost certain of ending there , where the rest of the day was spent by himself at the side of Marianne , and by his favourite pointer at her feet .
One evening in particular , about a week after Colonel Brandon left the country , his heart seemed more than usually open to every feeling of attachment to the objects around him ; and on Mrs .
Dashwood's happening to mention her design of improving the cottage in the spring , he warmly opposed every alteration of a place which affection had established as perfect with him .
`` What ! ''
he exclaimed -- '' Improve this dear cottage !
No .
THAT I will never consent to .
Not a stone must be added to its walls , not an inch to its size , if my feelings are regarded . ''
`` Do not be alarmed , '' said Miss Dashwood , '' nothing of the kind will be done ; for my mother will never have money enough to attempt it . ''
`` I am heartily glad of it , '' he cried .
`` May she always be poor , if she can employ her riches no better . ''
`` Thank you , Willoughby .
But you may be assured that I would not sacrifice one sentiment of local attachment of yours , or of any one whom I loved , for all the improvements in the world .
Depend upon it that whatever unemployed sum may remain , when I make up my accounts in the spring , I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dispose of it in a manner so painful to you .
But are you really so attached to this place as to see no defect in it ? ''
`` I am , '' said he .
`` To me it is faultless .
Nay , more , I consider it as the only form of building in which happiness is attainable , and were I rich enough I would instantly pull Combe down , and build it up again in the exact plan of this cottage . ''
`` With dark narrow stairs and a kitchen that smokes , I suppose , '' said Elinor .
`` Yes , '' cried he in the same eager tone , `` with all and every thing belonging to it ; -- in no one convenience or INconvenience about it , should the least variation be perceptible .
Then , and then only , under such a roof , I might perhaps be as happy at Combe as I have been at Barton . ''
`` I flatter myself , '' replied Elinor , `` that even under the disadvantage of better rooms and a broader staircase , you will hereafter find your own house as faultless as you now do this . ''
`` There certainly are circumstances , '' said Willoughby , '' which might greatly endear it to me ; but this place will always have one claim of my affection , which no other can possibly share . ''
Mrs .
Dashwood looked with pleasure at Marianne , whose fine eyes were fixed so expressively on Willoughby , as plainly denoted how well she understood him .
`` How often did I wish , '' added he , `` when I was at Allenham this time twelvemonth , that Barton cottage were inhabited !
I never passed within view of it without admiring its situation , and grieving that no one should live in it .
How little did I then think that the very first news I should hear from Mrs .
Smith , when I next came into the country , would be that Barton cottage was taken : and I felt an immediate satisfaction and interest in the event , which nothing but a kind of prescience of what happiness I should experience from it , can account for .
Must it not have been so , Marianne ? ''
speaking to her in a lowered voice .
Then continuing his former tone , he said , `` And yet this house you would spoil , Mrs .
Dashwood ?
You would rob it of its simplicity by imaginary improvement !
and this dear parlour in which our acquaintance first began , and in which so many happy hours have been since spent by us together , you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance , and every body would be eager to pass through the room which has hitherto contained within itself more real accommodation and comfort than any other apartment of the handsomest dimensions in the world could possibly afford . ''
Mrs .
Dashwood again assured him that no alteration of the kind should be attempted .
`` You are a good woman , '' he warmly replied .
`` Your promise makes me easy .
Extend it a little farther , and it will make me happy .
Tell me that not only your house will remain the same , but that I shall ever find you and yours as unchanged as your dwelling ; and that you will always consider me with the kindness which has made everything belonging to you so dear to me . ''
The promise was readily given , and Willoughby's behaviour during the whole of the evening declared at once his affection and happiness .
`` Shall we see you tomorrow to dinner ? ''
said Mrs .
Dashwood , when he was leaving them .
`` I do not ask you to come in the morning , for we must walk to the park , to call on Lady Middleton . ''
He engaged to be with them by four o'clock .
CHAPTER 15 Mrs .
Dashwood 's visit to Lady Middleton took place the next day , and two of her daughters went with her ; but Marianne excused herself from being of the party , under some trifling pretext of employment ; and her mother , who concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughby the night before of calling on her while they were absent , was perfectly satisfied with her remaining at home .
On their return from the park they found Willoughby's curricle and servant in waiting at the cottage , and Mrs .
Dashwood was convinced that her conjecture had been just .
So far it was all as she had foreseen ; but on entering the house she beheld what no foresight had taught her to expect .
They were no sooner in the passage than Marianne came hastily out of the parlour apparently in violent affliction , with her handkerchief at her eyes ; and without noticing them ran up stairs .
Surprised and alarmed they proceeded directly into the room she had just quitted , where they found only Willoughby , who was leaning against the mantel-piece with his back towards them .
He turned round on their coming in , and his countenance shewed that he strongly partook of the emotion which over-powered Marianne .
`` Is anything the matter with her ? ''
cried Mrs .
Dashwood as she entered -- '' is she ill ? ''
`` I hope not , '' he replied , trying to look cheerful ; and with a forced smile presently added , `` It is I who may rather expect to be ill -- for I am now suffering under a very heavy disappointment ! ''
`` Disappointment ? ''
`` Yes , for I am unable to keep my engagement with you .
Mrs .
Smith has this morning exercised the privilege of riches upon a poor dependent cousin , by sending me on business to London .
I have just received my dispatches , and taken my farewell of Allenham ; and by way of exhilaration I am now come to take my farewell of you . ''
`` To London ! -- and are you going this morning ? ''
`` Almost this moment . ''
`` This is very unfortunate .
But Mrs .
Smith must be obliged ; -- and her business will not detain you from us long I hope . ''
He coloured as he replied , `` You are very kind , but I have no idea of returning into Devonshire immediately .
My visits to Mrs .
Smith are never repeated within the twelvemonth . ''
`` And is Mrs .
Smith your only friend ?
Is Allenham the only house in the neighbourhood to which you will be welcome ?
For shame , Willoughby , can you wait for an invitation here ? ''
His colour increased ; and with his eyes fixed on the ground he only replied , `` You are too good . ''
Mrs .
Dashwood looked at Elinor with surprise .
Elinor felt equal amazement .
For a few moments every one was silent .
Mrs .
Dashwood first spoke .
`` I have only to add , my dear Willoughby , that at Barton cottage you will always be welcome ; for I will not press you to return here immediately , because you only can judge how far THAT might be pleasing to Mrs .
Smith ; and on this head I shall be no more disposed to question your judgment than to doubt your inclination . ''
`` My engagements at present , '' replied Willoughby , confusedly , `` are of such a nature -- that -- I dare not flatter myself '' -- He stopt .
Mrs .
Dashwood was too much astonished to speak , and another pause succeeded .
This was broken by Willoughby , who said with a faint smile , `` It is folly to linger in this manner .
I will not torment myself any longer by remaining among friends whose society it is impossible for me now to enjoy . ''
He then hastily took leave of them all and left the room .
They saw him step into his carriage , and in a minute it was out of sight .
Mrs .
Dashwood felt too much for speech , and instantly quitted the parlour to give way in solitude to the concern and alarm which this sudden departure occasioned .
Elinor 's uneasiness was at least equal to her mother 's .
She thought of what had just passed with anxiety and distrust .
Willoughby 's behaviour in taking leave of them , his embarrassment , and affectation of cheerfulness , and , above all , his unwillingness to accept her mother 's invitation , a backwardness so unlike a lover , so unlike himself , greatly disturbed her .
One moment she feared that no serious design had ever been formed on his side ; and the next that some unfortunate quarrel had taken place between him and her sister ; -- the distress in which Marianne had quitted the room was such as a serious quarrel could most reasonably account for , though when she considered what Marianne 's love for him was , a quarrel seemed almost impossible .
But whatever might be the particulars of their separation , her sister 's affliction was indubitable ; and she thought with the tenderest compassion of that violent sorrow which Marianne was in all probability not merely giving way to as a relief , but feeding and encouraging as a duty .
In about half an hour her mother returned , and though her eyes were red , her countenance was not uncheerful .
`` Our dear Willoughby is now some miles from Barton , Elinor , '' said she , as she sat down to work , `` and with how heavy a heart does he travel ? ''
`` It is all very strange .
So suddenly to be gone !
It seems but the work of a moment .
And last night he was with us so happy , so cheerful , so affectionate ?
And now , after only ten minutes notice -- Gone too without intending to return ! -- Something more than what be owned to us must have happened .
He did not speak , he did not behave like himself .
YOU must have seen the difference as well as I . What can it be ?
Can they have quarrelled ?
Why else should he have shewn such unwillingness to accept your invitation here ? ''
-- '' It was not inclination that he wanted , Elinor ; I could plainly see THAT .
He had not the power of accepting it .
I have thought it all over I assure you , and I can perfectly account for every thing that at first seemed strange to me as well as to you . ''
`` Can you , indeed ! ''
`` Yes .
I have explained it to myself in the most satisfactory way ; -- but you , Elinor , who love to doubt where you can -- it will not satisfy YOU , I know ; but you shall not talk ME out of my trust in it .
I am persuaded that Mrs .
Smith suspects his regard for Marianne , disapproves of it , ( perhaps because she has other views for him , ) and on that account is eager to get him away ; -- and that the business which she sends him off to transact is invented as an excuse to dismiss him .
This is what I believe to have happened .
He is , moreover , aware that she DOES disapprove the connection , he dares not therefore at present confess to her his engagement with Marianne , and he feels himself obliged , from his dependent situation , to give into her schemes , and absent himself from Devonshire for a while .
You will tell me , I know , that this may or may NOT have happened ; but I will listen to no cavil , unless you can point out any other method of understanding the affair as satisfactory at this .
And now , Elinor , what have you to say ? ''
`` Nothing , for you have anticipated my answer . ''
`` Then you would have told me , that it might or might not have happened .
Oh , Elinor , how incomprehensible are your feelings !
You had rather take evil upon credit than good .
You had rather look out for misery for Marianne , and guilt for poor Willoughby , than an apology for the latter .
You are resolved to think him blameable , because he took leave of us with less affection than his usual behaviour has shewn .
And is no allowance to be made for inadvertence , or for spirits depressed by recent disappointment ?
Are no probabilities to be accepted , merely because they are not certainties ?
Is nothing due to the man whom we have all such reason to love , and no reason in the world to think ill of ?
To the possibility of motives unanswerable in themselves , though unavoidably secret for a while ?
And , after all , what is it you suspect him of ? ''
`` I can hardly tell myself .
But suspicion of something unpleasant is the inevitable consequence of such an alteration as we just witnessed in him .
There is great truth , however , in what you have now urged of the allowances which ought to be made for him , and it is my wish to be candid in my judgment of every body .
Willoughby may undoubtedly have very sufficient reasons for his conduct , and I will hope that he has .
But it would have been more like Willoughby to acknowledge them at once .
Secrecy may be advisable ; but still I can not help wondering at its being practiced by him . ''
`` Do not blame him , however , for departing from his character , where the deviation is necessary .
But you really do admit the justice of what I have said in his defence ? -- I am happy -- and he is acquitted . ''
`` Not entirely .
It may be proper to conceal their engagement ( if they ARE engaged ) from Mrs .
Smith -- and if that is the case , it must be highly expedient for Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire at present .
But this is no excuse for their concealing it from us . ''
`` Concealing it from us !
my dear child , do you accuse Willoughby and Marianne of concealment ?
This is strange indeed , when your eyes have been reproaching them every day for incautiousness . ''
`` I want no proof of their affection , '' said Elinor ; '' but of their engagement I do . ''
`` I am perfectly satisfied of both . ''
`` Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the subject , by either of them . ''
`` I have not wanted syllables where actions have spoken so plainly .
Has not his behaviour to Marianne and to all of us , for at least the last fortnight , declared that he loved and considered her as his future wife , and that he felt for us the attachment of the nearest relation ?
Have we not perfectly understood each other ?
Has not my consent been daily asked by his looks , his manner , his attentive and affectionate respect ?
My Elinor , is it possible to doubt their engagement ?
How could such a thought occur to you ?
How is it to be supposed that Willoughby , persuaded as he must be of your sister 's love , should leave her , and leave her perhaps for months , without telling her of his affection ; -- that they should part without a mutual exchange of confidence ? ''
`` I confess , '' replied Elinor , `` that every circumstance except ONE is in favour of their engagement ; but that ONE is the total silence of both on the subject , and with me it almost outweighs every other . ''
`` How strange this is !
You must think wretchedly indeed of Willoughby , if , after all that has openly passed between them , you can doubt the nature of the terms on which they are together .
Has he been acting a part in his behaviour to your sister all this time ?
Do you suppose him really indifferent to her ? ''
`` No , I can not think that .
He must and does love her I am sure . ''
`` But with a strange kind of tenderness , if he can leave her with such indifference , such carelessness of the future , as you attribute to him . ''
`` You must remember , my dear mother , that I have never considered this matter as certain .
I have had my doubts , I confess ; but they are fainter than they were , and they may soon be entirely done away .
If we find they correspond , every fear of mine will be removed . ''
`` A mighty concession indeed !
If you were to see them at the altar , you would suppose they were going to be married .
Ungracious girl !
But I require no such proof .
Nothing in my opinion has ever passed to justify doubt ; no secrecy has been attempted ; all has been uniformly open and unreserved .
You can not doubt your sister 's wishes .
It must be Willoughby therefore whom you suspect .
But why ?
Is he not a man of honour and feeling ?
Has there been any inconsistency on his side to create alarm ?
can he be deceitful ? ''
`` I hope not , I believe not , '' cried Elinor .
`` I love Willoughby , sincerely love him ; and suspicion of his integrity can not be more painful to yourself than to me .
It has been involuntary , and I will not encourage it .
I was startled , I confess , by the alteration in his manners this morning ; -- he did not speak like himself , and did not return your kindness with any cordiality .
But all this may be explained by such a situation of his affairs as you have supposed .
He had just parted from my sister , had seen her leave him in the greatest affliction ; and if he felt obliged , from a fear of offending Mrs .
Smith , to resist the temptation of returning here soon , and yet aware that by declining your invitation , by saying that he was going away for some time , he should seem to act an ungenerous , a suspicious part by our family , be might well be embarrassed and disturbed .
In such a case , a plain and open avowal of his difficulties would have been more to his honour I think , as well as more consistent with his general character ; -- but I will not raise objections against any one 's conduct on so illiberal a foundation , as a difference in judgment from myself , or a deviation from what I may think right and consistent . ''
`` You speak very properly .
Willoughby certainly does not deserve to be suspected .
Though WE have not known him long , he is no stranger in this part of the world ; and who has ever spoken to his disadvantage ?
Had he been in a situation to act independently and marry immediately , it might have been odd that he should leave us without acknowledging everything to me at once : but this is not the case .
It is an engagement in some respects not prosperously begun , for their marriage must be at a very uncertain distance ; and even secrecy , as far as it can be observed , may now be very advisable . ''
They were interrupted by the entrance of Margaret ; and Elinor was then at liberty to think over the representations of her mother , to acknowledge the probability of many , and hope for the justice of all .
They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner time , when she entered the room and took her place at the table without saying a word .
Her eyes were red and swollen ; and it seemed as if her tears were even then restrained with difficulty .
She avoided the looks of them all , could neither eat nor speak , and after some time , on her mother 's silently pressing her hand with tender compassion , her small degree of fortitude was quite overcome , she burst into tears and left the room .
This violent oppression of spirits continued the whole evening .
She was without any power , because she was without any desire of command over herself .
The slightest mention of anything relative to Willoughby overpowered her in an instant ; and though her family were most anxiously attentive to her comfort , it was impossible for them , if they spoke at all , to keep clear of every subject which her feelings connected with him .
CHAPTER 16 Marianne would have thought herself very inexcusable had she been able to sleep at all the first night after parting from Willoughby .
She would have been ashamed to look her family in the face the next morning , had she not risen from her bed in more need of repose than when she lay down in it .
But the feelings which made such composure a disgrace , left her in no danger of incurring it .
She was awake the whole night , and she wept the greatest part of it .
She got up with a headache , was unable to talk , and unwilling to take any nourishment ; giving pain every moment to her mother and sisters , and forbidding all attempt at consolation from either .
Her sensibility was potent enough !
When breakfast was over she walked out by herself , and wandered about the village of Allenham , indulging the recollection of past enjoyment and crying over the present reverse for the chief of the morning .
The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of feeling .
She played over every favourite song that she had been used to play to Willoughby , every air in which their voices had been oftenest joined , and sat at the instrument gazing on every line of music that he had written out for her , till her heart was so heavy that no farther sadness could be gained ; and this nourishment of grief was every day applied .
She spent whole hours at the pianoforte alternately singing and crying ; her voice often totally suspended by her tears .
In books too , as well as in music , she courted the misery which a contrast between the past and present was certain of giving .
She read nothing but what they had been used to read together .
Such violence of affliction indeed could not be supported for ever ; it sunk within a few days into a calmer melancholy ; but these employments , to which she daily recurred , her solitary walks and silent meditations , still produced occasional effusions of sorrow as lively as ever .
No letter from Willoughby came ; and none seemed expected by Marianne .
Her mother was surprised , and Elinor again became uneasy .
But Mrs .
Dashwood could find explanations whenever she wanted them , which at least satisfied herself .
`` Remember , Elinor , '' said she , `` how very often Sir John fetches our letters himself from the post , and carries them to it .
We have already agreed that secrecy may be necessary , and we must acknowledge that it could not be maintained if their correspondence were to pass through Sir John 's hands . ''
Elinor could not deny the truth of this , and she tried to find in it a motive sufficient for their silence .
But there was one method so direct , so simple , and in her opinion so eligible of knowing the real state of the affair , and of instantly removing all mystery , that she could not help suggesting it to her mother .
`` Why do you not ask Marianne at once , '' said she , '' whether she is or she is not engaged to Willoughby ?
From you , her mother , and so kind , so indulgent a mother , the question could not give offence .
It would be the natural result of your affection for her .
She used to be all unreserve , and to you more especially . ''
`` I would not ask such a question for the world .
Supposing it possible that they are not engaged , what distress would not such an enquiry inflict !
At any rate it would be most ungenerous .
I should never deserve her confidence again , after forcing from her a confession of what is meant at present to be unacknowledged to any one .
I know Marianne 's heart : I know that she dearly loves me , and that I shall not be the last to whom the affair is made known , when circumstances make the revealment of it eligible .
I would not attempt to force the confidence of any one ; of a child much less ; because a sense of duty would prevent the denial which her wishes might direct . ''
Elinor thought this generosity overstrained , considering her sister 's youth , and urged the matter farther , but in vain ; common sense , common care , common prudence , were all sunk in Mrs .
Dashwood 's romantic delicacy .
It was several days before Willoughby 's name was mentioned before Marianne by any of her family ; Sir John and Mrs .
Jennings , indeed , were not so nice ; their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour ; -- but one evening , Mrs .
Dashwood , accidentally taking up a volume of Shakespeare , exclaimed , '' We have never finished Hamlet , Marianne ; our dear Willoughby went away before we could get through it .
We will put it by , that when he comes again ... But it may be months , perhaps , before THAT happens . ''
`` Months ! ''
cried Marianne , with strong surprise .
`` No -- nor many weeks . ''
Mrs .
Dashwood was sorry for what she had said ; but it gave Elinor pleasure , as it produced a reply from Marianne so expressive of confidence in Willoughby and knowledge of his intentions .
One morning , about a week after his leaving the country , Marianne was prevailed on to join her sisters in their usual walk , instead of wandering away by herself .
Hitherto she had carefully avoided every companion in her rambles .
If her sisters intended to walk on the downs , she directly stole away towards the lanes ; if they talked of the valley , she was as speedy in climbing the hills , and could never be found when the others set off .
But at length she was secured by the exertions of Elinor , who greatly disapproved such continual seclusion .
They walked along the road through the valley , and chiefly in silence , for Marianne 's MIND could not be controlled , and Elinor , satisfied with gaining one point , would not then attempt more .
Beyond the entrance of the valley , where the country , though still rich , was less wild and more open , a long stretch of the road which they had travelled on first coming to Barton , lay before them ; and on reaching that point , they stopped to look around them , and examine a prospect which formed the distance of their view from the cottage , from a spot which they had never happened to reach in any of their walks before .
Amongst the objects in the scene , they soon discovered an animated one ; it was a man on horseback riding towards them .
In a few minutes they could distinguish him to be a gentleman ; and in a moment afterwards Marianne rapturously exclaimed , '' It is he ; it is indeed ; -- I know it is ! ''
-- and was hastening to meet him , when Elinor cried out , '' Indeed , Marianne , I think you are mistaken .
It is not Willoughby .
The person is not tall enough for him , and has not his air . ''
`` He has , he has , '' cried Marianne , `` I am sure he has .
His air , his coat , his horse .
I knew how soon he would come . ''
She walked eagerly on as she spoke ; and Elinor , to screen Marianne from particularity , as she felt almost certain of its not being Willoughby , quickened her pace and kept up with her .
They were soon within thirty yards of the gentleman .
Marianne looked again ; her heart sunk within her ; and abruptly turning round , she was hurrying back , when the voices of both her sisters were raised to detain her ; a third , almost as well known as Willoughby 's , joined them in begging her to stop , and she turned round with surprise to see and welcome Edward Ferrars .
He was the only person in the world who could at that moment be forgiven for not being Willoughby ; the only one who could have gained a smile from her ; but she dispersed her tears to smile on HIM , and in her sister 's happiness forgot for a time her own disappointment .
He dismounted , and giving his horse to his servant , walked back with them to Barton , whither he was purposely coming to visit them .
He was welcomed by them all with great cordiality , but especially by Marianne , who showed more warmth of regard in her reception of him than even Elinor herself .
To Marianne , indeed , the meeting between Edward and her sister was but a continuation of that unaccountable coldness which she had often observed at Norland in their mutual behaviour .
On Edward 's side , more particularly , there was a deficiency of all that a lover ought to look and say on such an occasion .
He was confused , seemed scarcely sensible of pleasure in seeing them , looked neither rapturous nor gay , said little but what was forced from him by questions , and distinguished Elinor by no mark of affection .
Marianne saw and listened with increasing surprise .
She began almost to feel a dislike of Edward ; and it ended , as every feeling must end with her , by carrying back her thoughts to Willoughby , whose manners formed a contrast sufficiently striking to those of his brother elect .
After a short silence which succeeded the first surprise and enquiries of meeting , Marianne asked Edward if he came directly from London .
No , he had been in Devonshire a fortnight .
`` A fortnight ! ''
she repeated , surprised at his being so long in the same county with Elinor without seeing her before .
He looked rather distressed as he added , that he had been staying with some friends near Plymouth .
`` Have you been lately in Sussex ? ''
said Elinor .
`` I was at Norland about a month ago . ''
`` And how does dear , dear Norland look ? ''
cried Marianne .
`` Dear , dear Norland , '' said Elinor , `` probably looks much as it always does at this time of the year .
The woods and walks thickly covered with dead leaves . ''
`` Oh , '' cried Marianne , `` with what transporting sensation have I formerly seen them fall !
How have I delighted , as I walked , to see them driven in showers about me by the wind !
What feelings have they , the season , the air altogether inspired !
Now there is no one to regard them .
They are seen only as a nuisance , swept hastily off , and driven as much as possible from the sight . ''
`` It is not every one , '' said Elinor , `` who has your passion for dead leaves . ''
`` No ; my feelings are not often shared , not often understood .
But SOMETIMES they are . ''
-- As she said this , she sunk into a reverie for a few moments ; -- but rousing herself again , `` Now , Edward , '' said she , calling his attention to the prospect , `` here is Barton valley .
Look up to it , and be tranquil if you can .
Look at those hills !
Did you ever see their equals ?
To the left is Barton park , amongst those woods and plantations .
You may see the end of the house .
And there , beneath that farthest hill , which rises with such grandeur , is our cottage . ''
`` It is a beautiful country , '' he replied ; `` but these bottoms must be dirty in winter . ''
`` How can you think of dirt , with such objects before you ? ''
`` Because , '' replied he , smiling , `` among the rest of the objects before me , I see a very dirty lane . ''
`` How strange ! ''
said Marianne to herself as she walked on .
`` Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here ?
Are the Middletons pleasant people ? ''
`` No , not all , '' answered Marianne ; `` we could not be more unfortunately situated . ''
`` Marianne , '' cried her sister , `` how can you say so ?
How can you be so unjust ?
They are a very respectable family , Mr .
Ferrars ; and towards us have behaved in the friendliest manner .
Have you forgot , Marianne , how many pleasant days we have owed to them ? ''
`` No , '' said Marianne , in a low voice , `` nor how many painful moments . ''
Elinor took no notice of this ; and directing her attention to their visitor , endeavoured to support something like discourse with him , by talking of their present residence , its conveniences , & c. extorting from him occasional questions and remarks .
His coldness and reserve mortified her severely ; she was vexed and half angry ; but resolving to regulate her behaviour to him by the past rather than the present , she avoided every appearance of resentment or displeasure , and treated him as she thought he ought to be treated from the family connection .
CHAPTER 17 Mrs .
Dashwood was surprised only for a moment at seeing him ; for his coming to Barton was , in her opinion , of all things the most natural .
Her joy and expression of regard long outlived her wonder .
He received the kindest welcome from her ; and shyness , coldness , reserve could not stand against such a reception .
They had begun to fail him before he entered the house , and they were quite overcome by the captivating manners of Mrs .
Dashwood .
Indeed a man could not very well be in love with either of her daughters , without extending the passion to her ; and Elinor had the satisfaction of seeing him soon become more like himself .
His affections seemed to reanimate towards them all , and his interest in their welfare again became perceptible .
He was not in spirits , however ; he praised their house , admired its prospect , was attentive , and kind ; but still he was not in spirits .
The whole family perceived it , and Mrs .
Dashwood , attributing it to some want of liberality in his mother , sat down to table indignant against all selfish parents .
`` What are Mrs .
Ferrars 's views for you at present , Edward ? ''
said she , when dinner was over and they had drawn round the fire ; `` are you still to be a great orator in spite of yourself ? ''
`` No .
I hope my mother is now convinced that I have no more talents than inclination for a public life ! ''
`` But how is your fame to be established ?
for famous you must be to satisfy all your family ; and with no inclination for expense , no affection for strangers , no profession , and no assurance , you may find it a difficult matter . ''
`` I shall not attempt it .
I have no wish to be distinguished ; and have every reason to hope I never shall .
Thank Heaven !
I can not be forced into genius and eloquence . ''
`` You have no ambition , I well know .
Your wishes are all moderate . ''
`` As moderate as those of the rest of the world , I believe .
I wish as well as every body else to be perfectly happy ; but , like every body else it must be in my own way .
Greatness will not make me so . ''
`` Strange that it would ! ''
cried Marianne .
`` What have wealth or grandeur to do with happiness ? ''
`` Grandeur has but little , '' said Elinor , `` but wealth has much to do with it . ''
`` Elinor , for shame ! ''
said Marianne , `` money can only give happiness where there is nothing else to give it .
Beyond a competence , it can afford no real satisfaction , as far as mere self is concerned . ''
`` Perhaps , '' said Elinor , smiling , `` we may come to the same point .
YOUR competence and MY wealth are very much alike , I dare say ; and without them , as the world goes now , we shall both agree that every kind of external comfort must be wanting .
Your ideas are only more noble than mine .
Come , what is your competence ? ''
`` About eighteen hundred or two thousand a year ; not more than THAT . ''
Elinor laughed .
`` TWO thousand a year !
ONE is my wealth !
I guessed how it would end . ''
`` And yet two thousand a-year is a very moderate income , '' said Marianne .
`` A family can not well be maintained on a smaller .
I am sure I am not extravagant in my demands .
A proper establishment of servants , a carriage , perhaps two , and hunters , can not be supported on less . ''
Elinor smiled again , to hear her sister describing so accurately their future expenses at Combe Magna .
`` Hunters ! ''
repeated Edward -- '' but why must you have hunters ?
Every body does not hunt . ''
Marianne coloured as she replied , `` But most people do . ''
`` I wish , '' said Margaret , striking out a novel thought , '' that somebody would give us all a large fortune apiece ! ''
`` Oh that they would ! ''
cried Marianne , her eyes sparkling with animation , and her cheeks glowing with the delight of such imaginary happiness .
`` We are all unanimous in that wish , I suppose , '' said Elinor , `` in spite of the insufficiency of wealth . ''
`` Oh dear ! ''
cried Margaret , `` how happy I should be !
I wonder what I should do with it ! ''
Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point .
`` I should be puzzled to spend so large a fortune myself , '' said Mrs .
Dashwood , `` if my children were all to be rich my help . ''
`` You must begin your improvements on this house , '' observed Elinor , `` and your difficulties will soon vanish . ''
`` What magnificent orders would travel from this family to London , '' said Edward , `` in such an event !
What a happy day for booksellers , music-sellers , and print-shops !
You , Miss Dashwood , would give a general commission for every new print of merit to be sent you -- and as for Marianne , I know her greatness of soul , there would not be music enough in London to content her .
And books ! -- Thomson , Cowper , Scott -- she would buy them all over and over again : she would buy up every copy , I believe , to prevent their falling into unworthy hands ; and she would have every book that tells her how to admire an old twisted tree .
Should not you , Marianne ?
Forgive me , if I am very saucy .
But I was willing to shew you that I had not forgot our old disputes . ''
`` I love to be reminded of the past , Edward -- whether it be melancholy or gay , I love to recall it -- and you will never offend me by talking of former times .
You are very right in supposing how my money would be spent -- some of it , at least -- my loose cash would certainly be employed in improving my collection of music and books . ''
`` And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in annuities on the authors or their heirs . ''
`` No , Edward , I should have something else to do with it . ''
`` Perhaps , then , you would bestow it as a reward on that person who wrote the ablest defence of your favourite maxim , that no one can ever be in love more than once in their life -- your opinion on that point is unchanged , I presume ? ''
`` Undoubtedly .
At my time of life opinions are tolerably fixed .
It is not likely that I should now see or hear any thing to change them . ''
`` Marianne is as steadfast as ever , you see , '' said Elinor , '' she is not at all altered . ''
`` She is only grown a little more grave than she was . ''
`` Nay , Edward , '' said Marianne , `` you need not reproach me .
You are not very gay yourself . ''
`` Why should you think so ! ''
replied he , with a sigh .
`` But gaiety never was a part of MY character . ''
`` Nor do I think it a part of Marianne 's , '' said Elinor ; '' I should hardly call her a lively girl -- she is very earnest , very eager in all she does -- sometimes talks a great deal and always with animation -- but she is not often really merry . ''
`` I believe you are right , '' he replied , `` and yet I have always set her down as a lively girl . ''
`` I have frequently detected myself in such kind of mistakes , '' said Elinor , `` in a total misapprehension of character in some point or other : fancying people so much more gay or grave , or ingenious or stupid than they really are , and I can hardly tell why or in what the deception originated .
Sometimes one is guided by what they say of themselves , and very frequently by what other people say of them , without giving oneself time to deliberate and judge . ''
`` But I thought it was right , Elinor , '' said Marianne , '' to be guided wholly by the opinion of other people .
I thought our judgments were given us merely to be subservient to those of neighbours .
This has always been your doctrine , I am sure . ''
`` No , Marianne , never .
My doctrine has never aimed at the subjection of the understanding .
All I have ever attempted to influence has been the behaviour .
You must not confound my meaning .
I am guilty , I confess , of having often wished you to treat our acquaintance in general with greater attention ; but when have I advised you to adopt their sentiments or to conform to their judgment in serious matters ? ''
`` You have not been able to bring your sister over to your plan of general civility , '' said Edward to Elinor , `` Do you gain no ground ? ''
`` Quite the contrary , '' replied Elinor , looking expressively at Marianne .
`` My judgment , '' he returned , `` is all on your side of the question ; but I am afraid my practice is much more on your sister 's .
I never wish to offend , but I am so foolishly shy , that I often seem negligent , when I am only kept back by my natural awkwardness .
I have frequently thought that I must have been intended by nature to be fond of low company , I am so little at my ease among strangers of gentility ! ''
`` Marianne has not shyness to excuse any inattention of hers , '' said Elinor .
`` She knows her own worth too well for false shame , '' replied Edward .
`` Shyness is only the effect of a sense of inferiority in some way or other .
If I could persuade myself that my manners were perfectly easy and graceful , I should not be shy . ''
`` But you would still be reserved , '' said Marianne , '' and that is worse . ''
Edward started -- '' Reserved !
Am I reserved , Marianne ? ''
`` Yes , very . ''
`` I do not understand you , '' replied he , colouring .
`` Reserved ! -- how , in what manner ?
What am I to tell you ?
What can you suppose ? ''
Elinor looked surprised at his emotion ; but trying to laugh off the subject , she said to him , `` Do not you know my sister well enough to understand what she means ?
Do not you know she calls every one reserved who does not talk as fast , and admire what she admires as rapturously as herself ? ''
Edward made no answer .
His gravity and thoughtfulness returned on him in their fullest extent -- and he sat for some time silent and dull .
CHAPTER 18 Elinor saw , with great uneasiness the low spirits of her friend .
His visit afforded her but a very partial satisfaction , while his own enjoyment in it appeared so imperfect .
It was evident that he was unhappy ; she wished it were equally evident that he still distinguished her by the same affection which once she had felt no doubt of inspiring ; but hitherto the continuance of his preference seemed very uncertain ; and the reservedness of his manner towards her contradicted one moment what a more animated look had intimated the preceding one .
He joined her and Marianne in the breakfast-room the next morning before the others were down ; and Marianne , who was always eager to promote their happiness as far as she could , soon left them to themselves .
But before she was half way upstairs she heard the parlour door open , and , turning round , was astonished to see Edward himself come out .
`` I am going into the village to see my horses , '' said be , `` as you are not yet ready for breakfast ; I shall be back again presently . ''
* * * Edward returned to them with fresh admiration of the surrounding country ; in his walk to the village , he had seen many parts of the valley to advantage ; and the village itself , in a much higher situation than the cottage , afforded a general view of the whole , which had exceedingly pleased him .
This was a subject which ensured Marianne 's attention , and she was beginning to describe her own admiration of these scenes , and to question him more minutely on the objects that had particularly struck him , when Edward interrupted her by saying , `` You must not enquire too far , Marianne -- remember I have no knowledge in the picturesque , and I shall offend you by my ignorance and want of taste if we come to particulars .
I shall call hills steep , which ought to be bold ; surfaces strange and uncouth , which ought to be irregular and rugged ; and distant objects out of sight , which ought only to be indistinct through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere .
You must be satisfied with such admiration as I can honestly give .
I call it a very fine country -- the hills are steep , the woods seem full of fine timber , and the valley looks comfortable and snug -- with rich meadows and several neat farm houses scattered here and there .
It exactly answers my idea of a fine country , because it unites beauty with utility -- and I dare say it is a picturesque one too , because you admire it ; I can easily believe it to be full of rocks and promontories , grey moss and brush wood , but these are all lost on me .
I know nothing of the picturesque . ''
`` I am afraid it is but too true , '' said Marianne ; '' but why should you boast of it ? ''
`` I suspect , '' said Elinor , `` that to avoid one kind of affectation , Edward here falls into another .
Because he believes many people pretend to more admiration of the beauties of nature than they really feel , and is disgusted with such pretensions , he affects greater indifference and less discrimination in viewing them himself than he possesses .
He is fastidious and will have an affectation of his own . ''
`` It is very true , '' said Marianne , `` that admiration of landscape scenery is become a mere jargon .
Every body pretends to feel and tries to describe with the taste and elegance of him who first defined what picturesque beauty was .
I detest jargon of every kind , and sometimes I have kept my feelings to myself , because I could find no language to describe them in but what was worn and hackneyed out of all sense and meaning . ''
`` I am convinced , '' said Edward , `` that you really feel all the delight in a fine prospect which you profess to feel .
But , in return , your sister must allow me to feel no more than I profess .
I like a fine prospect , but not on picturesque principles .
I do not like crooked , twisted , blasted trees .
I admire them much more if they are tall , straight , and flourishing .
I do not like ruined , tattered cottages .
I am not fond of nettles or thistles , or heath blossoms .
I have more pleasure in a snug farm-house than a watch-tower -- and a troop of tidy , happy villages please me better than the finest banditti in the world . ''
Marianne looked with amazement at Edward , with compassion at her sister .
Elinor only laughed .
The subject was continued no farther ; and Marianne remained thoughtfully silent , till a new object suddenly engaged her attention .
She was sitting by Edward , and in taking his tea from Mrs .
Dashwood , his hand passed so directly before her , as to make a ring , with a plait of hair in the centre , very conspicuous on one of his fingers .
`` I never saw you wear a ring before , Edward , '' she cried .
`` Is that Fanny 's hair ?
I remember her promising to give you some .
But I should have thought her hair had been darker . ''
Marianne spoke inconsiderately what she really felt -- but when she saw how much she had pained Edward , her own vexation at her want of thought could not be surpassed by his .
He coloured very deeply , and giving a momentary glance at Elinor , replied , `` Yes ; it is my sister 's hair .
The setting always casts a different shade on it , you know . ''
Elinor had met his eye , and looked conscious likewise .
That the hair was her own , she instantaneously felt as well satisfied as Marianne ; the only difference in their conclusions was , that what Marianne considered as a free gift from her sister , Elinor was conscious must have been procured by some theft or contrivance unknown to herself .
She was not in a humour , however , to regard it as an affront , and affecting to take no notice of what passed , by instantly talking of something else , she internally resolved henceforward to catch every opportunity of eyeing the hair and of satisfying herself , beyond all doubt , that it was exactly the shade of her own .
Edward 's embarrassment lasted some time , and it ended in an absence of mind still more settled .
He was particularly grave the whole morning .
Marianne severely censured herself for what she had said ; but her own forgiveness might have been more speedy , had she known how little offence it had given her sister .
Before the middle of the day , they were visited by Sir John and Mrs .
Jennings , who , having heard of the arrival of a gentleman at the cottage , came to take a survey of the guest .
With the assistance of his mother-in-law , Sir John was not long in discovering that the name of Ferrars began with an F. and this prepared a future mine of raillery against the devoted Elinor , which nothing but the newness of their acquaintance with Edward could have prevented from being immediately sprung .
But , as it was , she only learned , from some very significant looks , how far their penetration , founded on Margaret 's instructions , extended .
Sir John never came to the Dashwoods without either inviting them to dine at the park the next day , or to drink tea with them that evening .
On the present occasion , for the better entertainment of their visitor , towards whose amusement he felt himself bound to contribute , he wished to engage them for both .
`` You MUST drink tea with us to night , '' said he , '' for we shall be quite alone -- and tomorrow you must absolutely dine with us , for we shall be a large party . ''
Mrs .
Jennings enforced the necessity .
`` And who knows but you may raise a dance , '' said she .
`` And that will tempt YOU , Miss Marianne . ''
`` A dance ! ''
cried Marianne .
`` Impossible !
Who is to dance ? ''
`` Who !
why yourselves , and the Careys , and Whitakers to be sure. -- What !
you thought nobody could dance because a certain person that shall be nameless is gone ! ''
`` I wish with all my soul , '' cried Sir John , '' that Willoughby were among us again . ''
This , and Marianne 's blushing , gave new suspicions to Edward .
`` And who is Willoughby ? ''
said he , in a low voice , to Miss Dashwood , by whom he was sitting .
She gave him a brief reply .
Marianne 's countenance was more communicative .
Edward saw enough to comprehend , not only the meaning of others , but such of Marianne's expressions as had puzzled him before ; and when their visitors left them , he went immediately round her , and said , in a whisper , `` I have been guessing .
Shall I tell you my guess ? ''
`` What do you mean ? ''
`` Shall I tell you . ''
`` Certainly . ''
`` Well then ; I guess that Mr .
Willoughby hunts . ''
Marianne was surprised and confused , yet she could not help smiling at the quiet archness of his manner , and after a moment 's silence , said , '' Oh , Edward !
How can you ? -- But the time will come I hope ... I am sure you will like him . ''
`` I do not doubt it , '' replied he , rather astonished at her earnestness and warmth ; for had he not imagined it to be a joke for the good of her acquaintance in general , founded only on a something or a nothing between Mr .
Willoughby and herself , he would not have ventured to mention it .
CHAPTER 19 Edward remained a week at the cottage ; he was earnestly pressed by Mrs .
Dashwood to stay longer ; but , as if he were bent only on self-mortification , he seemed resolved to be gone when his enjoyment among his friends was at the height .
His spirits , during the last two or three days , though still very unequal , were greatly improved -- he grew more and more partial to the house and environs -- never spoke of going away without a sigh -- declared his time to be wholly disengaged -- even doubted to what place he should go when he left them -- but still , go he must .
Never had any week passed so quickly -- he could hardly believe it to be gone .
He said so repeatedly ; other things he said too , which marked the turn of his feelings and gave the lie to his actions .
He had no pleasure at Norland ; he detested being in town ; but either to Norland or London , he must go .
He valued their kindness beyond any thing , and his greatest happiness was in being with them .
Yet , he must leave them at the end of a week , in spite of their wishes and his own , and without any restraint on his time .
Elinor placed all that was astonishing in this way of acting to his mother 's account ; and it was happy for her that he had a mother whose character was so imperfectly known to her , as to be the general excuse for every thing strange on the part of her son .
Disappointed , however , and vexed as she was , and sometimes displeased with his uncertain behaviour to herself , she was very well disposed on the whole to regard his actions with all the candid allowances and generous qualifications , which had been rather more painfully extorted from her , for Willoughby 's service , by her mother .
His want of spirits , of openness , and of consistency , were most usually attributed to his want of independence , and his better knowledge of Mrs .
Ferrars 's disposition and designs .
The shortness of his visit , the steadiness of his purpose in leaving them , originated in the same fettered inclination , the same inevitable necessity of temporizing with his mother .
The old well-established grievance of duty against will , parent against child , was the cause of all .
She would have been glad to know when these difficulties were to cease , this opposition was to yield , -- when Mrs .
Ferrars would be reformed , and her son be at liberty to be happy .
But from such vain wishes she was forced to turn for comfort to the renewal of her confidence in Edward 's affection , to the remembrance of every mark of regard in look or word which fell from him while at Barton , and above all to that flattering proof of it which he constantly wore round his finger .
`` I think , Edward , '' said Mrs .
Dashwood , as they were at breakfast the last morning , `` you would be a happier man if you had any profession to engage your time and give an interest to your plans and actions .
Some inconvenience to your friends , indeed , might result from it -- you would not be able to give them so much of your time .
But ( with a smile ) you would be materially benefited in one particular at least -- you would know where to go when you left them . ''
`` I do assure you , '' he replied , `` that I have long thought on this point , as you think now .
It has been , and is , and probably will always be a heavy misfortune to me , that I have had no necessary business to engage me , no profession to give me employment , or afford me any thing like independence .
But unfortunately my own nicety , and the nicety of my friends , have made me what I am , an idle , helpless being .
We never could agree in our choice of a profession .
I always preferred the church , as I still do .
But that was not smart enough for my family .
They recommended the army .
That was a great deal too smart for me .
The law was allowed to be genteel enough ; many young men , who had chambers in the Temple , made a very good appearance in the first circles , and drove about town in very knowing gigs .
But I had no inclination for the law , even in this less abstruse study of it , which my family approved .
As for the navy , it had fashion on its side , but I was too old when the subject was first started to enter it -- and , at length , as there was no necessity for my having any profession at all , as I might be as dashing and expensive without a red coat on my back as with one , idleness was pronounced on the whole to be most advantageous and honourable , and a young man of eighteen is not in general so earnestly bent on being busy as to resist the solicitations of his friends to do nothing .
I was therefore entered at Oxford and have been properly idle ever since . ''
`` The consequence of which , I suppose , will be , '' said Mrs .
Dashwood , `` since leisure has not promoted your own happiness , that your sons will be brought up to as many pursuits , employments , professions , and trades as Columella 's . ''
`` They will be brought up , '' said he , in a serious accent , '' to be as unlike myself as is possible .
In feeling , in action , in condition , in every thing . ''
`` Come , come ; this is all an effusion of immediate want of spirits , Edward .
You are in a melancholy humour , and fancy that any one unlike yourself must be happy .
But remember that the pain of parting from friends will be felt by every body at times , whatever be their education or state .
Know your own happiness .
You want nothing but patience -- or give it a more fascinating name , call it hope .
Your mother will secure to you , in time , that independence you are so anxious for ; it is her duty , and it will , it must ere long become her happiness to prevent your whole youth from being wasted in discontent .
How much may not a few months do ? ''
`` I think , '' replied Edward , `` that I may defy many months to produce any good to me . ''
This desponding turn of mind , though it could not be communicated to Mrs .
Dashwood , gave additional pain to them all in the parting , which shortly took place , and left an uncomfortable impression on Elinor's feelings especially , which required some trouble and time to subdue .
But as it was her determination to subdue it , and to prevent herself from appearing to suffer more than what all her family suffered on his going away , she did not adopt the method so judiciously employed by Marianne , on a similar occasion , to augment and fix her sorrow , by seeking silence , solitude and idleness .
Their means were as different as their objects , and equally suited to the advancement of each .
Elinor sat down to her drawing-table as soon as he was out of the house , busily employed herself the whole day , neither sought nor avoided the mention of his name , appeared to interest herself almost as much as ever in the general concerns of the family , and if , by this conduct , she did not lessen her own grief , it was at least prevented from unnecessary increase , and her mother and sisters were spared much solicitude on her account .
Such behaviour as this , so exactly the reverse of her own , appeared no more meritorious to Marianne , than her own had seemed faulty to her .
The business of self-command she settled very easily ; -- with strong affections it was impossible , with calm ones it could have no merit .
That her sister 's affections WERE calm , she dared not deny , though she blushed to acknowledge it ; and of the strength of her own , she gave a very striking proof , by still loving and respecting that sister , in spite of this mortifying conviction .
Without shutting herself up from her family , or leaving the house in determined solitude to avoid them , or lying awake the whole night to indulge meditation , Elinor found every day afforded her leisure enough to think of Edward , and of Edward 's behaviour , in every possible variety which the different state of her spirits at different times could produce , -- with tenderness , pity , approbation , censure , and doubt .
There were moments in abundance , when , if not by the absence of her mother and sisters , at least by the nature of their employments , conversation was forbidden among them , and every effect of solitude was produced .
Her mind was inevitably at liberty ; her thoughts could not be chained elsewhere ; and the past and the future , on a subject so interesting , must be before her , must force her attention , and engross her memory , her reflection , and her fancy .
From a reverie of this kind , as she sat at her drawing-table , she was roused one morning , soon after Edward 's leaving them , by the arrival of company .
She happened to be quite alone .
The closing of the little gate , at the entrance of the green court in front of the house , drew her eyes to the window , and she saw a large party walking up to the door .
Amongst them were Sir John and Lady Middleton and Mrs .
Jennings , but there were two others , a gentleman and lady , who were quite unknown to her .
She was sitting near the window , and as soon as Sir John perceived her , he left the rest of the party to the ceremony of knocking at the door , and stepping across the turf , obliged her to open the casement to speak to him , though the space was so short between the door and the window , as to make it hardly possible to speak at one without being heard at the other .
`` Well , '' said he , `` we have brought you some strangers .
How do you like them ? ''
`` Hush !
they will hear you . ''
`` Never mind if they do .
It is only the Palmers .
Charlotte is very pretty , I can tell you .
You may see her if you look this way . ''
As Elinor was certain of seeing her in a couple of minutes , without taking that liberty , she begged to be excused .
`` Where is Marianne ?
Has she run away because we are come ?
I see her instrument is open . ''
`` She is walking , I believe . ''
They were now joined by Mrs .
Jennings , who had not patience enough to wait till the door was opened before she told HER story .
She came hallooing to the window , '' How do you do , my dear ?
How does Mrs .
Dashwood do ?
And where are your sisters ?
What !
all alone !
you will be glad of a little company to sit with you .
I have brought my other son and daughter to see you .
Only think of their coming so suddenly !
I thought I heard a carriage last night , while we were drinking our tea , but it never entered my head that it could be them .
I thought of nothing but whether it might not be Colonel Brandon come back again ; so I said to Sir John , I do think I hear a carriage ; perhaps it is Colonel Brandon come back again '' -- Elinor was obliged to turn from her , in the middle of her story , to receive the rest of the party ; Lady Middleton introduced the two strangers ; Mrs .
Dashwood and Margaret came down stairs at the same time , and they all sat down to look at one another , while Mrs .
Jennings continued her story as she walked through the passage into the parlour , attended by Sir John .
Mrs .
Palmer was several years younger than Lady Middleton , and totally unlike her in every respect .
She was short and plump , had a very pretty face , and the finest expression of good humour in it that could possibly be .
Her manners were by no means so elegant as her sister 's , but they were much more prepossessing .
She came in with a smile , smiled all the time of her visit , except when she laughed , and smiled when she went away .
Her husband was a grave looking young man of five or six and twenty , with an air of more fashion and sense than his wife , but of less willingness to please or be pleased .
He entered the room with a look of self-consequence , slightly bowed to the ladies , without speaking a word , and , after briefly surveying them and their apartments , took up a newspaper from the table , and continued to read it as long as he staid .
Mrs .
Palmer , on the contrary , who was strongly endowed by nature with a turn for being uniformly civil and happy , was hardly seated before her admiration of the parlour and every thing in it burst forth .
`` Well !
what a delightful room this is !
I never saw anything so charming !
Only think , Mamma , how it is improved since I was here last !
I always thought it such a sweet place , ma'am !
( turning to Mrs .
Dashwood ) but you have made it so charming !
Only look , sister , how delightful every thing is !
How I should like such a house for myself !
Should not you , Mr .
Palmer ? ''
Mr .
Palmer made her no answer , and did not even raise his eyes from the newspaper .
`` Mr .
Palmer does not hear me , '' said she , laughing ; '' he never does sometimes .
It is so ridiculous ! ''
This was quite a new idea to Mrs .
Dashwood ; she had never been used to find wit in the inattention of any one , and could not help looking with surprise at them both .
Mrs .
Jennings , in the meantime , talked on as loud as she could , and continued her account of their surprise , the evening before , on seeing their friends , without ceasing till every thing was told .
Mrs .
Palmer laughed heartily at the recollection of their astonishment , and every body agreed , two or three times over , that it had been quite an agreeable surprise .
`` You may believe how glad we all were to see them , '' added Mrs .
Jennings , leaning forward towards Elinor , and speaking in a low voice as if she meant to be heard by no one else , though they were seated on different sides of the room ; `` but , however , I ca n't help wishing they had not travelled quite so fast , nor made such a long journey of it , for they came all round by London upon account of some business , for you know ( nodding significantly and pointing to her daughter ) it was wrong in her situation .
I wanted her to stay at home and rest this morning , but she would come with us ; she longed so much to see you all ! ''
Mrs .
Palmer laughed , and said it would not do her any harm .
`` She expects to be confined in February , '' continued Mrs .
Jennings .
Lady Middleton could no longer endure such a conversation , and therefore exerted herself to ask Mr .
Palmer if there was any news in the paper .
`` No , none at all , '' he replied , and read on .
`` Here comes Marianne , '' cried Sir John .
`` Now , Palmer , you shall see a monstrous pretty girl . ''
He immediately went into the passage , opened the front door , and ushered her in himself .
Mrs .
Jennings asked her , as soon as she appeared , if she had not been to Allenham ; and Mrs .
Palmer laughed so heartily at the question , as to show she understood it .
Mr .
Palmer looked up on her entering the room , stared at her some minutes , and then returned to his newspaper .
Mrs .
Palmer 's eye was now caught by the drawings which hung round the room .
She got up to examine them .
`` Oh !
dear , how beautiful these are !
Well !
how delightful !
Do but look , mama , how sweet !
I declare they are quite charming ; I could look at them for ever . ''
And then sitting down again , she very soon forgot that there were any such things in the room .
When Lady Middleton rose to go away , Mr .
Palmer rose also , laid down the newspaper , stretched himself and looked at them all around .
`` My love , have you been asleep ? ''
said his wife , laughing .
He made her no answer ; and only observed , after again examining the room , that it was very low pitched , and that the ceiling was crooked .
He then made his bow , and departed with the rest .
Sir John had been very urgent with them all to spend the next day at the park .
Mrs .
Dashwood , who did not chuse to dine with them oftener than they dined at the cottage , absolutely refused on her own account ; her daughters might do as they pleased .
But they had no curiosity to see how Mr .
and Mrs .
Palmer ate their dinner , and no expectation of pleasure from them in any other way .
They attempted , therefore , likewise , to excuse themselves ; the weather was uncertain , and not likely to be good .
But Sir John would not be satisfied -- the carriage should be sent for them and they must come .
Lady Middleton too , though she did not press their mother , pressed them .
Mrs .
Jennings and Mrs .
Palmer joined their entreaties , all seemed equally anxious to avoid a family party ; and the young ladies were obliged to yield .
`` Why should they ask us ? ''
said Marianne , as soon as they were gone .
`` The rent of this cottage is said to be low ; but we have it on very hard terms , if we are to dine at the park whenever any one is staying either with them , or with us . ''
`` They mean no less to be civil and kind to us now , '' said Elinor , `` by these frequent invitations , than by those which we received from them a few weeks ago .
The alteration is not in them , if their parties are grown tedious and dull .
We must look for the change elsewhere . ''
CHAPTER 20 As the Miss Dashwoods entered the drawing-room of the park the next day , at one door , Mrs .
Palmer came running in at the other , looking as good humoured and merry as before .
She took them all most affectionately by the hand , and expressed great delight in seeing them again .
`` I am so glad to see you ! ''
said she , seating herself between Elinor and Marianne , `` for it is so bad a day I was afraid you might not come , which would be a shocking thing , as we go away again tomorrow .
We must go , for the Westons come to us next week you know .
It was quite a sudden thing our coming at all , and I knew nothing of it till the carriage was coming to the door , and then Mr .
Palmer asked me if I would go with him to Barton .
He is so droll !
He never tells me any thing !
I am so sorry we can not stay longer ; however we shall meet again in town very soon , I hope . ''
They were obliged to put an end to such an expectation .
`` Not go to town ! ''
cried Mrs .
Palmer , with a laugh , '' I shall be quite disappointed if you do not .
I could get the nicest house in world for you , next door to ours , in Hanover-square .
You must come , indeed .
I am sure I shall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till I am confined , if Mrs .
Dashwood should not like to go into public . ''
They thanked her ; but were obliged to resist all her entreaties .
`` Oh , my love , '' cried Mrs .
Palmer to her husband , who just then entered the room -- '' you must help me to persuade the Miss Dashwoods to go to town this winter . ''
Her love made no answer ; and after slightly bowing to the ladies , began complaining of the weather .
`` How horrid all this is ! ''
said he .
`` Such weather makes every thing and every body disgusting .
Dullness is as much produced within doors as without , by rain .
It makes one detest all one 's acquaintance .
What the devil does Sir John mean by not having a billiard room in his house ?
How few people know what comfort is !
Sir John is as stupid as the weather . ''
The rest of the company soon dropt in .
`` I am afraid , Miss Marianne , '' said Sir John , `` you have not been able to take your usual walk to Allenham today . ''
Marianne looked very grave and said nothing .
`` Oh , do n't be so sly before us , '' said Mrs .
Palmer ; '' for we know all about it , I assure you ; and I admire your taste very much , for I think he is extremely handsome .
We do not live a great way from him in the country , you know .
Not above ten miles , I dare say . ''
`` Much nearer thirty , '' said her husband .
`` Ah , well !
there is not much difference .
I never was at his house ; but they say it is a sweet pretty place . ''
`` As vile a spot as I ever saw in my life , '' said Mr .
Palmer .
Marianne remained perfectly silent , though her countenance betrayed her interest in what was said .
`` Is it very ugly ? ''
continued Mrs .
Palmer -- '' then it must be some other place that is so pretty I suppose . ''
When they were seated in the dining room , Sir John observed with regret that they were only eight all together .
`` My dear , '' said he to his lady , `` it is very provoking that we should be so few .
Why did not you ask the Gilberts to come to us today ? ''
`` Did not I tell you , Sir John , when you spoke to me about it before , that it could not be done ?
They dined with us last . ''
`` You and I , Sir John , '' said Mrs .
Jennings , '' should not stand upon such ceremony . ''
`` Then you would be very ill-bred , '' cried Mr .
Palmer .
`` My love you contradict every body , '' said his wife with her usual laugh .
`` Do you know that you are quite rude ? ''
`` I did not know I contradicted any body in calling your mother ill-bred . ''
`` Ay , you may abuse me as you please , '' said the good-natured old lady , `` you have taken Charlotte off my hands , and can not give her back again .
So there I have the whip hand of you . ''
Charlotte laughed heartily to think that her husband could not get rid of her ; and exultingly said , she did not care how cross he was to her , as they must live together .
It was impossible for any one to be more thoroughly good-natured , or more determined to be happy than Mrs .
Palmer .
The studied indifference , insolence , and discontent of her husband gave her no pain ; and when he scolded or abused her , she was highly diverted .
`` Mr .
Palmer is so droll ! ''
said she , in a whisper , to Elinor .
`` He is always out of humour . ''
Elinor was not inclined , after a little observation , to give him credit for being so genuinely and unaffectedly ill-natured or ill-bred as he wished to appear .
His temper might perhaps be a little soured by finding , like many others of his sex , that through some unaccountable bias in favour of beauty , he was the husband of a very silly woman , -- but she knew that this kind of blunder was too common for any sensible man to be lastingly hurt by it. -- It was rather a wish of distinction , she believed , which produced his contemptuous treatment of every body , and his general abuse of every thing before him .
It was the desire of appearing superior to other people .
The motive was too common to be wondered at ; but the means , however they might succeed by establishing his superiority in ill-breeding , were not likely to attach any one to him except his wife .
`` Oh , my dear Miss Dashwood , '' said Mrs .
Palmer soon afterwards , '' I have got such a favour to ask of you and your sister .
Will you come and spend some time at Cleveland this Christmas ?
Now , pray do , -- and come while the Westons are with us .
You can not think how happy I shall be !
It will be quite delightful ! -- My love , '' applying to her husband , '' do n't you long to have the Miss Dashwoods come to Cleveland ? ''
`` Certainly , '' he replied , with a sneer -- '' I came into Devonshire with no other view . ''
`` There now , '' -- said his lady , `` you see Mr .
Palmer expects you ; so you can not refuse to come . ''
They both eagerly and resolutely declined her invitation .
`` But indeed you must and shall come .
I am sure you will like it of all things .
The Westons will be with us , and it will be quite delightful .
You can not think what a sweet place Cleveland is ; and we are so gay now , for Mr .
Palmer is always going about the country canvassing against the election ; and so many people came to dine with us that I never saw before , it is quite charming !
But , poor fellow !
it is very fatiguing to him !
for he is forced to make every body like him . ''
Elinor could hardly keep her countenance as she assented to the hardship of such an obligation .
`` How charming it will be , '' said Charlotte , `` when he is in Parliament ! -- wo n't it ?
How I shall laugh !
It will be so ridiculous to see all his letters directed to him with an M.P. -- But do you know , he says , he will never frank for me ?
He declares he wo n't .
Do n't you , Mr .
Palmer ? ''
Mr .
Palmer took no notice of her .
`` He can not bear writing , you know , '' she continued -- '' he says it is quite shocking . ''
`` No , '' said he , `` I never said any thing so irrational .
Do n't palm all your abuses of languages upon me . ''
`` There now ; you see how droll he is .
This is always the way with him !
Sometimes he wo n't speak to me for half a day together , and then he comes out with something so droll -- all about any thing in the world . ''
She surprised Elinor very much as they returned into the drawing-room , by asking her whether she did not like Mr .
Palmer excessively .
`` Certainly , '' said Elinor ; `` he seems very agreeable . ''
`` Well -- I am so glad you do .
I thought you would , he is so pleasant ; and Mr .
Palmer is excessively pleased with you and your sisters I can tell you , and you can't think how disappointed he will be if you do n't come to Cleveland. -- I ca n't imagine why you should object to it . ''
Elinor was again obliged to decline her invitation ; and by changing the subject , put a stop to her entreaties .
She thought it probable that as they lived in the same county , Mrs .
Palmer might be able to give some more particular account of Willoughby 's general character , than could be gathered from the Middletons' partial acquaintance with him ; and she was eager to gain from any one , such a confirmation of his merits as might remove the possibility of fear from Marianne .
She began by inquiring if they saw much of Mr .
Willoughby at Cleveland , and whether they were intimately acquainted with him .
`` Oh dear , yes ; I know him extremely well , '' replied Mrs .
Palmer ; -- '' Not that I ever spoke to him , indeed ; but I have seen him for ever in town .
Somehow or other I never happened to be staying at Barton while he was at Allenham .
Mama saw him here once before ; -- but I was with my uncle at Weymouth .
However , I dare say we should have seen a great deal of him in Somersetshire , if it had not happened very unluckily that we should never have been in the country together .
He is very little at Combe , I believe ; but if he were ever so much there , I do not think Mr .
Palmer would visit him , for he is in the opposition , you know , and besides it is such a way off .
I know why you inquire about him , very well ; your sister is to marry him .
I am monstrous glad of it , for then I shall have her for a neighbour you know . ''
`` Upon my word , '' replied Elinor , `` you know much more of the matter than I do , if you have any reason to expect such a match . ''
`` Do n't pretend to deny it , because you know it is what every body talks of .
I assure you I heard of it in my way through town . ''
`` My dear Mrs .
Palmer ! ''
`` Upon my honour I did. -- I met Colonel Brandon Monday morning in Bond-street , just before we left town , and he told me of it directly . ''
`` You surprise me very much .
Colonel Brandon tell you of it !
Surely you must be mistaken .
To give such intelligence to a person who could not be interested in it , even if it were true , is not what I should expect Colonel Brandon to do . ''
`` But I do assure you it was so , for all that , and I will tell you how it happened .
When we met him , he turned back and walked with us ; and so we began talking of my brother and sister , and one thing and another , and I said to him , 'So , Colonel , there is a new family come to Barton cottage , I hear , and mama sends me word they are very pretty , and that one of them is going to be married to Mr .
Willoughby of Combe Magna .
Is it true , pray ?
for of course you must know , as you have been in Devonshire so lately . ' ''
`` And what did the Colonel say ? ''
`` Oh -- he did not say much ; but he looked as if he knew it to be true , so from that moment I set it down as certain .
It will be quite delightful , I declare !
When is it to take place ? ''
`` Mr .
Brandon was very well I hope ? ''
`` Oh !
yes , quite well ; and so full of your praises , he did nothing but say fine things of you . ''
`` I am flattered by his commendation .
He seems an excellent man ; and I think him uncommonly pleasing . ''
`` So do I. -- He is such a charming man , that it is quite a pity he should be so grave and so dull .
Mamma says HE was in love with your sister too. -- I assure you it was a great compliment if he was , for he hardly ever falls in love with any body . ''
`` Is Mr .
Willoughby much known in your part of Somersetshire ? ''
said Elinor .
`` Oh !
yes , extremely well ; that is , I do not believe many people are acquainted with him , because Combe Magna is so far off ; but they all think him extremely agreeable I assure you .
Nobody is more liked than Mr .
Willoughby wherever he goes , and so you may tell your sister .
She is a monstrous lucky girl to get him , upon my honour ; not but that he is much more lucky in getting her , because she is so very handsome and agreeable , that nothing can be good enough for her .
However , I do n't think her hardly at all handsomer than you , I assure you ; for I think you both excessively pretty , and so does Mr .
Palmer too I am sure , though we could not get him to own it last night . ''
Mrs .
Palmer 's information respecting Willoughby was not very material ; but any testimony in his favour , however small , was pleasing to her .
`` I am so glad we are got acquainted at last , '' continued Charlotte. -- '' And now I hope we shall always be great friends .
You ca n't think how much I longed to see you !
It is so delightful that you should live at the cottage !
Nothing can be like it , to be sure !
And I am so glad your sister is going to be well married !
I hope you will be a great deal at Combe Magna .
It is a sweet place , by all accounts . ''
`` You have been long acquainted with Colonel Brandon , have not you ? ''
`` Yes , a great while ; ever since my sister married. -- He was a particular friend of Sir John 's .
I believe , '' she added in a low voice , `` he would have been very glad to have had me , if he could .
Sir John and Lady Middleton wished it very much .
But mama did not think the match good enough for me , otherwise Sir John would have mentioned it to the Colonel , and we should have been married immediately . ''
`` Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John 's proposal to your mother before it was made ?
Had he never owned his affection to yourself ? ''
`` Oh , no ; but if mama had not objected to it , I dare say he would have liked it of all things .
He had not seen me then above twice , for it was before I left school .
However , I am much happier as I am .
Mr .
Palmer is the kind of man I like . ''
CHAPTER 21 The Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day , and the two families at Barton were again left to entertain each other .
But this did not last long ; Elinor had hardly got their last visitors out of her head , had hardly done wondering at Charlotte 's being so happy without a cause , at Mr .
Palmer 's acting so simply , with good abilities , and at the strange unsuitableness which often existed between husband and wife , before Sir John 's and Mrs .
Jennings's active zeal in the cause of society , procured her some other new acquaintance to see and observe .
In a morning 's excursion to Exeter , they had met with two young ladies , whom Mrs .
Jennings had the satisfaction of discovering to be her relations , and this was enough for Sir John to invite them directly to the park , as soon as their present engagements at Exeter were over .
Their engagements at Exeter instantly gave way before such an invitation , and Lady Middleton was thrown into no little alarm on the return of Sir John , by hearing that she was very soon to receive a visit from two girls whom she had never seen in her life , and of whose elegance , -- whose tolerable gentility even , she could have no proof ; for the assurances of her husband and mother on that subject went for nothing at all .
Their being her relations too made it so much the worse ; and Mrs .
Jennings 's attempts at consolation were therefore unfortunately founded , when she advised her daughter not to care about their being so fashionable ; because they were all cousins and must put up with one another .
As it was impossible , however , now to prevent their coming , Lady Middleton resigned herself to the idea of it , with all the philosophy of a well-bred woman , contenting herself with merely giving her husband a gentle reprimand on the subject five or six times every day .
The young ladies arrived : their appearance was by no means ungenteel or unfashionable .
Their dress was very smart , their manners very civil , they were delighted with the house , and in raptures with the furniture , and they happened to be so doatingly fond of children that Lady Middleton 's good opinion was engaged in their favour before they had been an hour at the Park .
She declared them to be very agreeable girls indeed , which for her ladyship was enthusiastic admiration .
Sir John 's confidence in his own judgment rose with this animated praise , and he set off directly for the cottage to tell the Miss Dashwoods of the Miss Steeles ' arrival , and to assure them of their being the sweetest girls in the world .
From such commendation as this , however , there was not much to be learned ; Elinor well knew that the sweetest girls in the world were to be met with in every part of England , under every possible variation of form , face , temper and understanding .
Sir John wanted the whole family to walk to the Park directly and look at his guests .
Benevolent , philanthropic man !
It was painful to him even to keep a third cousin to himself .
`` Do come now , '' said he -- '' pray come -- you must come -- I declare you shall come -- You ca n't think how you will like them .
Lucy is monstrous pretty , and so good humoured and agreeable !
The children are all hanging about her already , as if she was an old acquaintance .
And they both long to see you of all things , for they have heard at Exeter that you are the most beautiful creatures in the world ; and I have told them it is all very true , and a great deal more .
You will be delighted with them I am sure .
They have brought the whole coach full of playthings for the children .
How can you be so cross as not to come ?
Why they are your cousins , you know , after a fashion .
YOU are my cousins , and they are my wife 's , so you must be related . ''
But Sir John could not prevail .
He could only obtain a promise of their calling at the Park within a day or two , and then left them in amazement at their indifference , to walk home and boast anew of their attractions to the Miss Steeles , as he had been already boasting of the Miss Steeles to them .
When their promised visit to the Park and consequent introduction to these young ladies took place , they found in the appearance of the eldest , who was nearly thirty , with a very plain and not a sensible face , nothing to admire ; but in the other , who was not more than two or three and twenty , they acknowledged considerable beauty ; her features were pretty , and she had a sharp quick eye , and a smartness of air , which though it did not give actual elegance or grace , gave distinction to her person. -- Their manners were particularly civil , and Elinor soon allowed them credit for some kind of sense , when she saw with what constant and judicious attention they were making themselves agreeable to Lady Middleton .
With her children they were in continual raptures , extolling their beauty , courting their notice , and humouring their whims ; and such of their time as could be spared from the importunate demands which this politeness made on it , was spent in admiration of whatever her ladyship was doing , if she happened to be doing any thing , or in taking patterns of some elegant new dress , in which her appearance the day before had thrown them into unceasing delight .
Fortunately for those who pay their court through such foibles , a fond mother , though , in pursuit of praise for her children , the most rapacious of human beings , is likewise the most credulous ; her demands are exorbitant ; but she will swallow any thing ; and the excessive affection and endurance of the Miss Steeles towards her offspring were viewed therefore by Lady Middleton without the smallest surprise or distrust .
She saw with maternal complacency all the impertinent encroachments and mischievous tricks to which her cousins submitted .
She saw their sashes untied , their hair pulled about their ears , their work-bags searched , and their knives and scissors stolen away , and felt no doubt of its being a reciprocal enjoyment .
It suggested no other surprise than that Elinor and Marianne should sit so composedly by , without claiming a share in what was passing .
`` John is in such spirits today ! ''
said she , on his taking Miss Steeles 's pocket handkerchief , and throwing it out of window -- '' He is full of monkey tricks . ''
And soon afterwards , on the second boy 's violently pinching one of the same lady 's fingers , she fondly observed , '' How playful William is ! ''
`` And here is my sweet little Annamaria , '' she added , tenderly caressing a little girl of three years old , who had not made a noise for the last two minutes ; '' And she is always so gentle and quiet -- Never was there such a quiet little thing ! ''
But unfortunately in bestowing these embraces , a pin in her ladyship 's head dress slightly scratching the child 's neck , produced from this pattern of gentleness such violent screams , as could hardly be outdone by any creature professedly noisy .
The mother 's consternation was excessive ; but it could not surpass the alarm of the Miss Steeles , and every thing was done by all three , in so critical an emergency , which affection could suggest as likely to assuage the agonies of the little sufferer .
She was seated in her mother 's lap , covered with kisses , her wound bathed with lavender-water , by one of the Miss Steeles , who was on her knees to attend her , and her mouth stuffed with sugar plums by the other .
With such a reward for her tears , the child was too wise to cease crying .
She still screamed and sobbed lustily , kicked her two brothers for offering to touch her , and all their united soothings were ineffectual till Lady Middleton luckily remembering that in a scene of similar distress last week , some apricot marmalade had been successfully applied for a bruised temple , the same remedy was eagerly proposed for this unfortunate scratch , and a slight intermission of screams in the young lady on hearing it , gave them reason to hope that it would not be rejected. -- She was carried out of the room therefore in her mother 's arms , in quest of this medicine , and as the two boys chose to follow , though earnestly entreated by their mother to stay behind , the four young ladies were left in a quietness which the room had not known for many hours .
`` Poor little creatures ! ''
said Miss Steele , as soon as they were gone .
`` It might have been a very sad accident . ''
`` Yet I hardly know how , '' cried Marianne , `` unless it had been under totally different circumstances .
But this is the usual way of heightening alarm , where there is nothing to be alarmed at in reality . ''
`` What a sweet woman Lady Middleton is ! ''
said Lucy Steele .
Marianne was silent ; it was impossible for her to say what she did not feel , however trivial the occasion ; and upon Elinor therefore the whole task of telling lies when politeness required it , always fell .
She did her best when thus called on , by speaking of Lady Middleton with more warmth than she felt , though with far less than Miss Lucy .
`` And Sir John too , '' cried the elder sister , '' what a charming man he is ! ''
Here too , Miss Dashwood 's commendation , being only simple and just , came in without any eclat .
She merely observed that he was perfectly good humoured and friendly .
`` And what a charming little family they have !
I never saw such fine children in my life. -- I declare I quite doat upon them already , and indeed I am always distractedly fond of children . ''
`` I should guess so , '' said Elinor , with a smile , '' from what I have witnessed this morning . ''
`` I have a notion , '' said Lucy , `` you think the little Middletons rather too much indulged ; perhaps they may be the outside of enough ; but it is so natural in Lady Middleton ; and for my part , I love to see children full of life and spirits ; I can not bear them if they are tame and quiet . ''
`` I confess , '' replied Elinor , `` that while I am at Barton Park , I never think of tame and quiet children with any abhorrence . ''
A short pause succeeded this speech , which was first broken by Miss Steele , who seemed very much disposed for conversation , and who now said rather abruptly , '' And how do you like Devonshire , Miss Dashwood ?
I suppose you were very sorry to leave Sussex . ''
In some surprise at the familiarity of this question , or at least of the manner in which it was spoken , Elinor replied that she was .
`` Norland is a prodigious beautiful place , is not it ? ''
added Miss Steele .
`` We have heard Sir John admire it excessively , '' said Lucy , who seemed to think some apology necessary for the freedom of her sister .
`` I think every one MUST admire it , '' replied Elinor , '' who ever saw the place ; though it is not to be supposed that any one can estimate its beauties as we do . ''
`` And had you a great many smart beaux there ?
I suppose you have not so many in this part of the world ; for my part , I think they are a vast addition always . ''
`` But why should you think , '' said Lucy , looking ashamed of her sister , `` that there are not as many genteel young men in Devonshire as Sussex ? ''
`` Nay , my dear , I 'm sure I do n't pretend to say that there a n't .
I 'm sure there 's a vast many smart beaux in Exeter ; but you know , how could I tell what smart beaux there might be about Norland ; and I was only afraid the Miss Dashwoods might find it dull at Barton , if they had not so many as they used to have .
But perhaps you young ladies may not care about the beaux , and had as lief be without them as with them .
For my part , I think they are vastly agreeable , provided they dress smart and behave civil .
But I ca n't bear to see them dirty and nasty .
Now there's Mr .
Rose at Exeter , a prodigious smart young man , quite a beau , clerk to Mr .
Simpson , you know , and yet if you do but meet him of a morning , he is not fit to be seen. -- I suppose your brother was quite a beau , Miss Dashwood , before he married , as he was so rich ? ''
`` Upon my word , '' replied Elinor , `` I can not tell you , for I do not perfectly comprehend the meaning of the word .
But this I can say , that if he ever was a beau before he married , he is one still for there is not the smallest alteration in him . ''
`` Oh !
dear !
one never thinks of married men 's being beaux -- they have something else to do . ''
`` Lord !
Anne , '' cried her sister , `` you can talk of nothing but beaux ; -- you will make Miss Dashwood believe you think of nothing else . ''
And then to turn the discourse , she began admiring the house and the furniture .
This specimen of the Miss Steeles was enough .
The vulgar freedom and folly of the eldest left her no recommendation , and as Elinor was not blinded by the beauty , or the shrewd look of the youngest , to her want of real elegance and artlessness , she left the house without any wish of knowing them better .
Not so the Miss Steeles. -- They came from Exeter , well provided with admiration for the use of Sir John Middleton , his family , and all his relations , and no niggardly proportion was now dealt out to his fair cousins , whom they declared to be the most beautiful , elegant , accomplished , and agreeable girls they had ever beheld , and with whom they were particularly anxious to be better acquainted. -- And to be better acquainted therefore , Elinor soon found was their inevitable lot , for as Sir John was entirely on the side of the Miss Steeles , their party would be too strong for opposition , and that kind of intimacy must be submitted to , which consists of sitting an hour or two together in the same room almost every day .
Sir John could do no more ; but he did not know that any more was required : to be together was , in his opinion , to be intimate , and while his continual schemes for their meeting were effectual , he had not a doubt of their being established friends .
To do him justice , he did every thing in his power to promote their unreserve , by making the Miss Steeles acquainted with whatever he knew or supposed of his cousins' situations in the most delicate particulars , -- and Elinor had not seen them more than twice , before the eldest of them wished her joy on her sister 's having been so lucky as to make a conquest of a very smart beau since she came to Barton .
`` 'Twill be a fine thing to have her married so young to be sure , '' said she , `` and I hear he is quite a beau , and prodigious handsome .
And I hope you may have as good luck yourself soon , -- but perhaps you may have a friend in the corner already . ''
Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be more nice in proclaiming his suspicions of her regard for Edward , than he had been with respect to Marianne ; indeed it was rather his favourite joke of the two , as being somewhat newer and more conjectural ; and since Edward 's visit , they had never dined together without his drinking to her best affections with so much significancy and so many nods and winks , as to excite general attention .
The letter F -- had been likewise invariably brought forward , and found productive of such countless jokes , that its character as the wittiest letter in the alphabet had been long established with Elinor .
The Miss Steeles , as she expected , had now all the benefit of these jokes , and in the eldest of them they raised a curiosity to know the name of the gentleman alluded to , which , though often impertinently expressed , was perfectly of a piece with her general inquisitiveness into the concerns of their family .
But Sir John did not sport long with the curiosity which he delighted to raise , for he had at least as much pleasure in telling the name , as Miss Steele had in hearing it .
`` His name is Ferrars , '' said he , in a very audible whisper ; '' but pray do not tell it , for it 's a great secret . ''
`` Ferrars ! ''
repeated Miss Steele ; `` Mr .
Ferrars is the happy man , is he ?
What !
your sister-in-law 's brother , Miss Dashwood ?
a very agreeable young man to be sure ; I know him very well . ''
`` How can you say so , Anne ? ''
cried Lucy , who generally made an amendment to all her sister 's assertions .
`` Though we have seen him once or twice at my uncle 's , it is rather too much to pretend to know him very well . ''
Elinor heard all this with attention and surprise .
`` And who was this uncle ?
Where did he live ?
How came they acquainted ? ''
She wished very much to have the subject continued , though she did not chuse to join in it herself ; but nothing more of it was said , and for the first time in her life , she thought Mrs .
Jennings deficient either in curiosity after petty information , or in a disposition to communicate it .
The manner in which Miss Steele had spoken of Edward , increased her curiosity ; for it struck her as being rather ill-natured , and suggested the suspicion of that lady 's knowing , or fancying herself to know something to his disadvantage. -- But her curiosity was unavailing , for no farther notice was taken of Mr .
Ferrars 's name by Miss Steele when alluded to , or even openly mentioned by Sir John .
CHAPTER 22 Marianne , who had never much toleration for any thing like impertinence , vulgarity , inferiority of parts , or even difference of taste from herself , was at this time particularly ill-disposed , from the state of her spirits , to be pleased with the Miss Steeles , or to encourage their advances ; and to the invariable coldness of her behaviour towards them , which checked every endeavour at intimacy on their side , Elinor principally attributed that preference of herself which soon became evident in the manners of both , but especially of Lucy , who missed no opportunity of engaging her in conversation , or of striving to improve their acquaintance by an easy and frank communication of her sentiments .
Lucy was naturally clever ; her remarks were often just and amusing ; and as a companion for half an hour Elinor frequently found her agreeable ; but her powers had received no aid from education : she was ignorant and illiterate ; and her deficiency of all mental improvement , her want of information in the most common particulars , could not be concealed from Miss Dashwood , in spite of her constant endeavour to appear to advantage .
Elinor saw , and pitied her for , the neglect of abilities which education might have rendered so respectable ; but she saw , with less tenderness of feeling , the thorough want of delicacy , of rectitude , and integrity of mind , which her attentions , her assiduities , her flatteries at the Park betrayed ; and she could have no lasting satisfaction in the company of a person who joined insincerity with ignorance ; whose want of instruction prevented their meeting in conversation on terms of equality , and whose conduct toward others made every shew of attention and deference towards herself perfectly valueless .
`` You will think my question an odd one , I dare say , '' said Lucy to her one day , as they were walking together from the park to the cottage -- '' but pray , are you personally acquainted with your sister-in-law 's mother , Mrs .
Ferrars ? ''
Elinor DID think the question a very odd one , and her countenance expressed it , as she answered that she had never seen Mrs .
Ferrars .
`` Indeed ! ''
replied Lucy ; `` I wonder at that , for I thought you must have seen her at Norland sometimes .
Then , perhaps , you can not tell me what sort of a woman she is ? ''
`` No , '' returned Elinor , cautious of giving her real opinion of Edward 's mother , and not very desirous of satisfying what seemed impertinent curiosity -- '' I know nothing of her . ''
`` I am sure you think me very strange , for enquiring about her in such a way , '' said Lucy , eyeing Elinor attentively as she spoke ; `` but perhaps there may be reasons -- I wish I might venture ; but however I hope you will do me the justice of believing that I do not mean to be impertinent . ''
Elinor made her a civil reply , and they walked on for a few minutes in silence .
It was broken by Lucy , who renewed the subject again by saying , with some hesitation , '' I can not bear to have you think me impertinently curious .
I am sure I would rather do any thing in the world than be thought so by a person whose good opinion is so well worth having as yours .
And I am sure I should not have the smallest fear of trusting YOU ; indeed , I should be very glad of your advice how to manage in such and uncomfortable situation as I am ; but , however , there is no occasion to trouble YOU .
I am sorry you do not happen to know Mrs .
Ferrars . ''
`` I am sorry I do NOT , '' said Elinor , in great astonishment , '' if it could be of any use to YOU to know my opinion of her .
But really I never understood that you were at all connected with that family , and therefore I am a little surprised , I confess , at so serious an inquiry into her character . ''
`` I dare say you are , and I am sure I do not at all wonder at it .
But if I dared tell you all , you would not be so much surprised .
Mrs .
Ferrars is certainly nothing to me at present -- but the time MAY come -- how soon it will come must depend upon herself -- when we may be very intimately connected . ''
She looked down as she said this , amiably bashful , with only one side glance at her companion to observe its effect on her .
`` Good heavens ! ''
cried Elinor , `` what do you mean ?
Are you acquainted with Mr .
Robert Ferrars ?
Can you be ? ''
And she did not feel much delighted with the idea of such a sister-in-law .
`` No , '' replied Lucy , `` not to Mr .
ROBERT Ferrars -- I never saw him in my life ; but , '' fixing her eyes upon Elinor , '' to his eldest brother . ''
What felt Elinor at that moment ?
Astonishment , that would have been as painful as it was strong , had not an immediate disbelief of the assertion attended it .
She turned towards Lucy in silent amazement , unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration ; and though her complexion varied , she stood firm in incredulity , and felt in no danger of an hysterical fit , or a swoon .
`` You may well be surprised , '' continued Lucy ; '' for to be sure you could have had no idea of it before ; for I dare say he never dropped the smallest hint of it to you or any of your family ; because it was always meant to be a great secret , and I am sure has been faithfully kept so by me to this hour .
Not a soul of all my relations know of it but Anne , and I never should have mentioned it to you , if I had not felt the greatest dependence in the world upon your secrecy ; and I really thought my behaviour in asking so many questions about Mrs .
Ferrars must seem so odd , that it ought to be explained .
And I do not think Mr .
Ferrars can be displeased , when he knows I have trusted you , because I know he has the highest opinion in the world of all your family , and looks upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods quite as his own sisters . ''
-- She paused .
Elinor for a few moments remained silent .
Her astonishment at what she heard was at first too great for words ; but at length forcing herself to speak , and to speak cautiously , she said , with calmness of manner , which tolerably well concealed her surprise and solicitude -- '' May I ask if your engagement is of long standing ? ''
`` We have been engaged these four years . ''
`` Four years ! ''
`` Yes . ''
Elinor , though greatly shocked , still felt unable to believe it .
`` I did not know , '' said she , `` that you were even acquainted till the other day . ''
`` Our acquaintance , however , is of many years date .
He was under my uncle 's care , you know , a considerable while . ''
`` Your uncle ! ''
`` Yes ; Mr .
Pratt .
Did you never hear him talk of Mr .
Pratt ? ''
`` I think I have , '' replied Elinor , with an exertion of spirits , which increased with her increase of emotion .
`` He was four years with my uncle , who lives at Longstaple , near Plymouth .
It was there our acquaintance begun , for my sister and me was often staying with my uncle , and it was there our engagement was formed , though not till a year after he had quitted as a pupil ; but he was almost always with us afterwards .
I was very unwilling to enter into it , as you may imagine , without the knowledge and approbation of his mother ; but I was too young , and loved him too well , to be so prudent as I ought to have been. -- Though you do not know him so well as me , Miss Dashwood , you must have seen enough of him to be sensible he is very capable of making a woman sincerely attached to him . ''
`` Certainly , '' answered Elinor , without knowing what she said ; but after a moment 's reflection , she added , with revived security of Edward 's honour and love , and her companion 's falsehood -- '' Engaged to Mr .
Edward Ferrars ! -- I confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell me , that really -- I beg your pardon ; but surely there must be some mistake of person or name .
We can not mean the same Mr .
Ferrars . ''
`` We can mean no other , '' cried Lucy , smiling .
`` Mr .
Edward Ferrars , the eldest son of Mrs .
Ferrars , of Park Street , and brother of your sister-in-law , Mrs .
John Dashwood , is the person I mean ; you must allow that I am not likely to be deceived as to the name of the man on who all my happiness depends . ''
`` It is strange , '' replied Elinor , in a most painful perplexity , '' that I should never have heard him even mention your name . ''
`` No ; considering our situation , it was not strange .
Our first care has been to keep the matter secret. -- You knew nothing of me , or my family , and , therefore , there could be no OCCASION for ever mentioning my name to you ; and , as he was always particularly afraid of his sister 's suspecting any thing , THAT was reason enough for his not mentioning it . ''
She was silent. -- Elinor 's security sunk ; but her self-command did not sink with it .
`` Four years you have been engaged , '' said she with a firm voice .
`` Yes ; and heaven knows how much longer we may have to wait .
Poor Edward !
It puts him quite out of heart . ''
Then taking a small miniature from her pocket , she added , '' To prevent the possibility of mistake , be so good as to look at this face .
It does not do him justice , to be sure , but yet I think you can not be deceived as to the person it was drew for. -- I have had it above these three years . ''
She put it into her hands as she spoke ; and when Elinor saw the painting , whatever other doubts her fear of a too hasty decision , or her wish of detecting falsehood might suffer to linger in her mind , she could have none of its being Edward 's face .
She returned it almost instantly , acknowledging the likeness .
`` I have never been able , '' continued Lucy , `` to give him my picture in return , which I am very much vexed at , for he has been always so anxious to get it !
But I am determined to set for it the very first opportunity . ''
`` You are quite in the right , '' replied Elinor calmly .
They then proceeded a few paces in silence .
Lucy spoke first .
`` I am sure , '' said she , `` I have no doubt in the world of your faithfully keeping this secret , because you must know of what importance it is to us , not to have it reach his mother ; for she would never approve of it , I dare say .
I shall have no fortune , and I fancy she is an exceeding proud woman . ''
`` I certainly did not seek your confidence , '' said Elinor ; '' but you do me no more than justice in imagining that I may be depended on .
Your secret is safe with me ; but pardon me if I express some surprise at so unnecessary a communication .
You must at least have felt that my being acquainted with it could not add to its safety . ''
As she said this , she looked earnestly at Lucy , hoping to discover something in her countenance ; perhaps the falsehood of the greatest part of what she had been saying ; but Lucy 's countenance suffered no change .
`` I was afraid you would think I was taking a great liberty with you , '' said she , `` in telling you all this .
I have not known you long to be sure , personally at least , but I have known you and all your family by description a great while ; and as soon as I saw you , I felt almost as if you was an old acquaintance .
Besides in the present case , I really thought some explanation was due to you after my making such particular inquiries about Edward 's mother ; and I am so unfortunate , that I have not a creature whose advice I can ask .
Anne is the only person that knows of it , and she has no judgment at all ; indeed , she does me a great deal more harm than good , for I am in constant fear of her betraying me .
She does not know how to hold her tongue , as you must perceive , and I am sure I was in the greatest fright in the world t'other day , when Edward 's name was mentioned by Sir John , lest she should out with it all .
You ca n't think how much I go through in my mind from it altogether .
I only wonder that I am alive after what I have suffered for Edward 's sake these last four years .
Every thing in such suspense and uncertainty ; and seeing him so seldom -- we can hardly meet above twice a-year .
I am sure I wonder my heart is not quite broke . ''
Here she took out her handkerchief ; but Elinor did not feel very compassionate .
`` Sometimes . ''
continued Lucy , after wiping her eyes , '' I think whether it would not be better for us both to break off the matter entirely . ''
As she said this , she looked directly at her companion .
`` But then at other times I have not resolution enough for it. -- I can not bear the thoughts of making him so miserable , as I know the very mention of such a thing would do .
And on my own account too -- so dear as he is to me -- I don't think I could be equal to it .
What would you advise me to do in such a case , Miss Dashwood ?
What would you do yourself ? ''
`` Pardon me , '' replied Elinor , startled by the question ; '' but I can give you no advice under such circumstances .
Your own judgment must direct you . ''
`` To be sure , '' continued Lucy , after a few minutes silence on both sides , `` his mother must provide for him sometime or other ; but poor Edward is so cast down by it !
Did you not think him dreadful low-spirited when he was at Barton ?
He was so miserable when he left us at Longstaple , to go to you , that I was afraid you would think him quite ill . ''
`` Did he come from your uncle 's , then , when he visited us ? ''
`` Oh , yes ; he had been staying a fortnight with us .
Did you think he came directly from town ? ''
`` No , '' replied Elinor , most feelingly sensible of every fresh circumstance in favour of Lucy 's veracity ; '' I remember he told us , that he had been staying a fortnight with some friends near Plymouth . ''
She remembered too , her own surprise at the time , at his mentioning nothing farther of those friends , at his total silence with respect even to their names .
`` Did not you think him sadly out of spirits ? ''
repeated Lucy .
`` We did , indeed , particularly so when he first arrived . ''
`` I begged him to exert himself for fear you should suspect what was the matter ; but it made him so melancholy , not being able to stay more than a fortnight with us , and seeing me so much affected. -- Poor fellow ! -- I am afraid it is just the same with him now ; for he writes in wretched spirits .
I heard from him just before I left Exeter ; '' taking a letter from her pocket and carelessly showing the direction to Elinor .
`` You know his hand , I dare say , a charming one it is ; but that is not written so well as usual. -- He was tired , I dare say , for he had just filled the sheet to me as full as possible . ''
Elinor saw that it WAS his hand , and she could doubt no longer .
This picture , she had allowed herself to believe , might have been accidentally obtained ; it might not have been Edward 's gift ; but a correspondence between them by letter , could subsist only under a positive engagement , could be authorised by nothing else ; for a few moments , she was almost overcome -- her heart sunk within her , and she could hardly stand ; but exertion was indispensably necessary ; and she struggled so resolutely against the oppression of her feelings , that her success was speedy , and for the time complete .
`` Writing to each other , '' said Lucy , returning the letter into her pocket , `` is the only comfort we have in such long separations .
Yes , I have one other comfort in his picture , but poor Edward has not even THAT .
If he had but my picture , he says he should be easy .
I gave him a lock of my hair set in a ring when he was at Longstaple last , and that was some comfort to him , he said , but not equal to a picture .
Perhaps you might notice the ring when you saw him ? ''
`` I did , '' said Elinor , with a composure of voice , under which was concealed an emotion and distress beyond any thing she had ever felt before .
She was mortified , shocked , confounded .
Fortunately for her , they had now reached the cottage , and the conversation could be continued no farther .
After sitting with them a few minutes , the Miss Steeles returned to the Park , and Elinor was then at liberty to think and be wretched .
[ At this point in the first and second editions , Volume 1 ends . ]
CHAPTER 23 However small Elinor 's general dependence on Lucy 's veracity might be , it was impossible for her on serious reflection to suspect it in the present case , where no temptation could be answerable to the folly of inventing a falsehood of such a description .
What Lucy had asserted to be true , therefore , Elinor could not , dared not longer doubt ; supported as it was too on every side by such probabilities and proofs , and contradicted by nothing but her own wishes .
Their opportunity of acquaintance in the house of Mr .
Pratt was a foundation for the rest , at once indisputable and alarming ; and Edward's visit near Plymouth , his melancholy state of mind , his dissatisfaction at his own prospects , his uncertain behaviour towards herself , the intimate knowledge of the Miss Steeles as to Norland and their family connections , which had often surprised her , the picture , the letter , the ring , formed altogether such a body of evidence , as overcame every fear of condemning him unfairly , and established as a fact , which no partiality could set aside , his ill-treatment of herself. -- Her resentment of such behaviour , her indignation at having been its dupe , for a short time made her feel only for herself ; but other ideas , other considerations , soon arose .
Had Edward been intentionally deceiving her ?
Had he feigned a regard for her which he did not feel ?
Was his engagement to Lucy an engagement of the heart ?
No ; whatever it might once have been , she could not believe it such at present .
His affection was all her own .
She could not be deceived in that .
Her mother , sisters , Fanny , all had been conscious of his regard for her at Norland ; it was not an illusion of her own vanity .
He certainly loved her .
What a softener of the heart was this persuasion !
How much could it not tempt her to forgive !
He had been blamable , highly blamable , in remaining at Norland after he first felt her influence over him to be more than it ought to be .
In that , he could not be defended ; but if he had injured her , how much more had he injured himself ; if her case were pitiable , his was hopeless .
His imprudence had made her miserable for a while ; but it seemed to have deprived himself of all chance of ever being otherwise .
She might in time regain tranquillity ; but HE , what had he to look forward to ?
Could he ever be tolerably happy with Lucy Steele ; could he , were his affection for herself out of the question , with his integrity , his delicacy , and well-informed mind , be satisfied with a wife like her -- illiterate , artful , and selfish ?
The youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally blind him to every thing but her beauty and good nature ; but the four succeeding years -- years , which if rationally spent , give such improvement to the understanding , must have opened his eyes to her defects of education , while the same period of time , spent on her side in inferior society and more frivolous pursuits , had perhaps robbed her of that simplicity which might once have given an interesting character to her beauty .
If in the supposition of his seeking to marry herself , his difficulties from his mother had seemed great , how much greater were they now likely to be , when the object of his engagement was undoubtedly inferior in connections , and probably inferior in fortune to herself .
These difficulties , indeed , with a heart so alienated from Lucy , might not press very hard upon his patience ; but melancholy was the state of the person by whom the expectation of family opposition and unkindness , could be felt as a relief !
As these considerations occurred to her in painful succession , she wept for him , more than for herself .
Supported by the conviction of having done nothing to merit her present unhappiness , and consoled by the belief that Edward had done nothing to forfeit her esteem , she thought she could even now , under the first smart of the heavy blow , command herself enough to guard every suspicion of the truth from her mother and sisters .
And so well was she able to answer her own expectations , that when she joined them at dinner only two hours after she had first suffered the extinction of all her dearest hopes , no one would have supposed from the appearance of the sisters , that Elinor was mourning in secret over obstacles which must divide her for ever from the object of her love , and that Marianne was internally dwelling on the perfections of a man , of whose whole heart she felt thoroughly possessed , and whom she expected to see in every carriage which drove near their house .
The necessity of concealing from her mother and Marianne , what had been entrusted in confidence to herself , though it obliged her to unceasing exertion , was no aggravation of Elinor 's distress .
On the contrary it was a relief to her , to be spared the communication of what would give such affliction to them , and to be saved likewise from hearing that condemnation of Edward , which would probably flow from the excess of their partial affection for herself , and which was more than she felt equal to support .
From their counsel , or their conversation , she knew she could receive no assistance , their tenderness and sorrow must add to her distress , while her self-command would neither receive encouragement from their example nor from their praise .
She was stronger alone , and her own good sense so well supported her , that her firmness was as unshaken , her appearance of cheerfulness as invariable , as with regrets so poignant and so fresh , it was possible for them to be .
Much as she had suffered from her first conversation with Lucy on the subject , she soon felt an earnest wish of renewing it ; and this for more reasons than one .
She wanted to hear many particulars of their engagement repeated again , she wanted more clearly to understand what Lucy really felt for Edward , whether there were any sincerity in her declaration of tender regard for him , and she particularly wanted to convince Lucy , by her readiness to enter on the matter again , and her calmness in conversing on it , that she was no otherwise interested in it than as a friend , which she very much feared her involuntary agitation , in their morning discourse , must have left at least doubtful .
That Lucy was disposed to be jealous of her appeared very probable : it was plain that Edward had always spoken highly in her praise , not merely from Lucy 's assertion , but from her venturing to trust her on so short a personal acquaintance , with a secret so confessedly and evidently important .
And even Sir John 's joking intelligence must have had some weight .
But indeed , while Elinor remained so well assured within herself of being really beloved by Edward , it required no other consideration of probabilities to make it natural that Lucy should be jealous ; and that she was so , her very confidence was a proof .
What other reason for the disclosure of the affair could there be , but that Elinor might be informed by it of Lucy's superior claims on Edward , and be taught to avoid him in future ?
She had little difficulty in understanding thus much of her rival 's intentions , and while she was firmly resolved to act by her as every principle of honour and honesty directed , to combat her own affection for Edward and to see him as little as possible ; she could not deny herself the comfort of endeavouring to convince Lucy that her heart was unwounded .
And as she could now have nothing more painful to hear on the subject than had already been told , she did not mistrust her own ability of going through a repetition of particulars with composure .
But it was not immediately that an opportunity of doing so could be commanded , though Lucy was as well disposed as herself to take advantage of any that occurred ; for the weather was not often fine enough to allow of their joining in a walk , where they might most easily separate themselves from the others ; and though they met at least every other evening either at the park or cottage , and chiefly at the former , they could not be supposed to meet for the sake of conversation .
Such a thought would never enter either Sir John or Lady Middleton 's head ; and therefore very little leisure was ever given for a general chat , and none at all for particular discourse .
They met for the sake of eating , drinking , and laughing together , playing at cards , or consequences , or any other game that was sufficiently noisy .
One or two meetings of this kind had taken place , without affording Elinor any chance of engaging Lucy in private , when Sir John called at the cottage one morning , to beg , in the name of charity , that they would all dine with Lady Middleton that day , as he was obliged to attend the club at Exeter , and she would otherwise be quite alone , except her mother and the two Miss Steeles .
Elinor , who foresaw a fairer opening for the point she had in view , in such a party as this was likely to be , more at liberty among themselves under the tranquil and well-bred direction of Lady Middleton than when her husband united them together in one noisy purpose , immediately accepted the invitation ; Margaret , with her mother 's permission , was equally compliant , and Marianne , though always unwilling to join any of their parties , was persuaded by her mother , who could not bear to have her seclude herself from any chance of amusement , to go likewise .
The young ladies went , and Lady Middleton was happily preserved from the frightful solitude which had threatened her .
The insipidity of the meeting was exactly such as Elinor had expected ; it produced not one novelty of thought or expression , and nothing could be less interesting than the whole of their discourse both in the dining parlour and drawing room : to the latter , the children accompanied them , and while they remained there , she was too well convinced of the impossibility of engaging Lucy's attention to attempt it .
They quitted it only with the removal of the tea-things .
The card-table was then placed , and Elinor began to wonder at herself for having ever entertained a hope of finding time for conversation at the park .
They all rose up in preparation for a round game .
`` I am glad , '' said Lady Middleton to Lucy , '' you are not going to finish poor little Annamaria's basket this evening ; for I am sure it must hurt your eyes to work filigree by candlelight .
And we will make the dear little love some amends for her disappointment to-morrow , and then I hope she will not much mind it . ''
This hint was enough , Lucy recollected herself instantly and replied , `` Indeed you are very much mistaken , Lady Middleton ; I am only waiting to know whether you can make your party without me , or I should have been at my filigree already .
I would not disappoint the little angel for all the world : and if you want me at the card-table now , I am resolved to finish the basket after supper . ''
`` You are very good , I hope it wo n't hurt your eyes -- will you ring the bell for some working candles ?
My poor little girl would be sadly disappointed , I know , if the basket was not finished tomorrow , for though I told her it certainly would not , I am sure she depends upon having it done . ''
Lucy directly drew her work table near her and reseated herself with an alacrity and cheerfulness which seemed to infer that she could taste no greater delight than in making a filigree basket for a spoilt child .
Lady Middleton proposed a rubber of Casino to the others .
No one made any objection but Marianne , who with her usual inattention to the forms of general civility , exclaimed , '' Your Ladyship will have the goodness to excuse ME -- you know I detest cards .
I shall go to the piano-forte ; I have not touched it since it was tuned . ''
And without farther ceremony , she turned away and walked to the instrument .
Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked heaven that SHE had never made so rude a speech .
`` Marianne can never keep long from that instrument you know , ma'am , '' said Elinor , endeavouring to smooth away the offence ; `` and I do not much wonder at it ; for it is the very best toned piano-forte I ever heard . ''
The remaining five were now to draw their cards .
`` Perhaps , '' continued Elinor , `` if I should happen to cut out , I may be of some use to Miss Lucy Steele , in rolling her papers for her ; and there is so much still to be done to the basket , that it must be impossible I think for her labour singly , to finish it this evening .
I should like the work exceedingly , if she would allow me a share in it . ''
`` Indeed I shall be very much obliged to you for your help , '' cried Lucy , `` for I find there is more to be done to it than I thought there was ; and it would be a shocking thing to disappoint dear Annamaria after all . ''
`` Oh !
that would be terrible , indeed , '' said Miss Steele -- '' Dear little soul , how I do love her ! ''
`` You are very kind , '' said Lady Middleton to Elinor ; '' and as you really like the work , perhaps you will be as well pleased not to cut in till another rubber , or will you take your chance now ? ''
Elinor joyfully profited by the first of these proposals , and thus by a little of that address which Marianne could never condescend to practise , gained her own end , and pleased Lady Middleton at the same time .
Lucy made room for her with ready attention , and the two fair rivals were thus seated side by side at the same table , and , with the utmost harmony , engaged in forwarding the same work .
The pianoforte at which Marianne , wrapped up in her own music and her own thoughts , had by this time forgotten that any body was in the room besides herself , was luckily so near them that Miss Dashwood now judged she might safely , under the shelter of its noise , introduce the interesting subject , without any risk of being heard at the card-table .
CHAPTER 24 In a firm , though cautious tone , Elinor thus began .
`` I should be undeserving of the confidence you have honoured me with , if I felt no desire for its continuance , or no farther curiosity on its subject .
I will not apologize therefore for bringing it forward again . ''
`` Thank you , '' cried Lucy warmly , `` for breaking the ice ; you have set my heart at ease by it ; for I was somehow or other afraid I had offended you by what I told you that Monday . ''
`` Offended me !
How could you suppose so ?
Believe me , '' and Elinor spoke it with the truest sincerity , '' nothing could be farther from my intention than to give you such an idea .
Could you have a motive for the trust , that was not honourable and flattering to me ? ''
`` And yet I do assure you , '' replied Lucy , her little sharp eyes full of meaning , `` there seemed to me to be a coldness and displeasure in your manner that made me quite uncomfortable .
I felt sure that you was angry with me ; and have been quarrelling with myself ever since , for having took such a liberty as to trouble you with my affairs .
But I am very glad to find it was only my own fancy , and that you really do not blame me .
If you knew what a consolation it was to me to relieve my heart speaking to you of what I am always thinking of every moment of my life , your compassion would make you overlook every thing else I am sure . ''
`` Indeed , I can easily believe that it was a very great relief to you , to acknowledge your situation to me , and be assured that you shall never have reason to repent it .
Your case is a very unfortunate one ; you seem to me to be surrounded with difficulties , and you will have need of all your mutual affection to support you under them .
Mr .
Ferrars , I believe , is entirely dependent on his mother . ''
`` He has only two thousand pounds of his own ; it would be madness to marry upon that , though for my own part , I could give up every prospect of more without a sigh .
I have been always used to a very small income , and could struggle with any poverty for him ; but I love him too well to be the selfish means of robbing him , perhaps , of all that his mother might give him if he married to please her .
We must wait , it may be for many years .
With almost every other man in the world , it would be an alarming prospect ; but Edward 's affection and constancy nothing can deprive me of I know . ''
`` That conviction must be every thing to you ; and he is undoubtedly supported by the same trust in your 's .
If the strength of your reciprocal attachment had failed , as between many people , and under many circumstances it naturally would during a four years ' engagement , your situation would have been pitiable , indeed . ''
Lucy here looked up ; but Elinor was careful in guarding her countenance from every expression that could give her words a suspicious tendency .
`` Edward 's love for me , '' said Lucy , `` has been pretty well put to the test , by our long , very long absence since we were first engaged , and it has stood the trial so well , that I should be unpardonable to doubt it now .
I can safely say that he has never gave me one moment's alarm on that account from the first . ''
Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sigh at this assertion .
Lucy went on .
`` I am rather of a jealous temper too by nature , and from our different situations in life , from his being so much more in the world than me , and our continual separation , I was enough inclined for suspicion , to have found out the truth in an instant , if there had been the slightest alteration in his behaviour to me when we met , or any lowness of spirits that I could not account for , or if he had talked more of one lady than another , or seemed in any respect less happy at Longstaple than he used to be .
I do not mean to say that I am particularly observant or quick-sighted in general , but in such a case I am sure I could not be deceived . ''
`` All this , '' thought Elinor , `` is very pretty ; but it can impose upon neither of us . ''
`` But what , '' said she after a short silence , '' are your views ?
or have you none but that of waiting for Mrs .
Ferrars 's death , which is a melancholy and shocking extremity ? -- Is her son determined to submit to this , and to all the tediousness of the many years of suspense in which it may involve you , rather than run the risk of her displeasure for a while by owning the truth ? ''
`` If we could be certain that it would be only for a while !
But Mrs .
Ferrars is a very headstrong proud woman , and in her first fit of anger upon hearing it , would very likely secure every thing to Robert , and the idea of that , for Edward 's sake , frightens away all my inclination for hasty measures . ''
`` And for your own sake too , or you are carrying your disinterestedness beyond reason . ''
Lucy looked at Elinor again , and was silent .
`` Do you know Mr .
Robert Ferrars ? ''
asked Elinor .
`` Not at all -- I never saw him ; but I fancy he is very unlike his brother -- silly and a great coxcomb . ''
`` A great coxcomb ! ''
repeated Miss Steele , whose ear had caught those words by a sudden pause in Marianne 's music. -- '' Oh , they are talking of their favourite beaux , I dare say . ''
`` No sister , '' cried Lucy , `` you are mistaken there , our favourite beaux are NOT great coxcombs . ''
`` I can answer for it that Miss Dashwood 's is not , '' said Mrs .
Jennings , laughing heartily ; `` for he is one of the modestest , prettiest behaved young men I ever saw ; but as for Lucy , she is such a sly little creature , there is no finding out who SHE likes . ''
`` Oh , '' cried Miss Steele , looking significantly round at them , `` I dare say Lucy 's beau is quite as modest and pretty behaved as Miss Dashwood 's . ''
Elinor blushed in spite of herself .
Lucy bit her lip , and looked angrily at her sister .
A mutual silence took place for some time .
Lucy first put an end to it by saying in a lower tone , though Marianne was then giving them the powerful protection of a very magnificent concerto -- '' I will honestly tell you of one scheme which has lately come into my head , for bringing matters to bear ; indeed I am bound to let you into the secret , for you are a party concerned .
I dare say you have seen enough of Edward to know that he would prefer the church to every other profession ; now my plan is that he should take orders as soon as he can , and then through your interest , which I am sure you would be kind enough to use out of friendship for him , and I hope out of some regard to me , your brother might be persuaded to give him Norland living ; which I understand is a very good one , and the present incumbent not likely to live a great while .
That would be enough for us to marry upon , and we might trust to time and chance for the rest . ''
`` I should always be happy , '' replied Elinor , `` to show any mark of my esteem and friendship for Mr .
Ferrars ; but do you not perceive that my interest on such an occasion would be perfectly unnecessary ?
He is brother to Mrs .
John Dashwood -- THAT must be recommendation enough to her husband . ''
`` But Mrs .
John Dashwood would not much approve of Edward 's going into orders . ''
`` Then I rather suspect that my interest would do very little . ''
They were again silent for many minutes .
At length Lucy exclaimed with a deep sigh , '' I believe it would be the wisest way to put an end to the business at once by dissolving the engagement .
We seem so beset with difficulties on every side , that though it would make us miserable for a time , we should be happier perhaps in the end .
But you will not give me your advice , Miss Dashwood ? ''
`` No , '' answered Elinor , with a smile , which concealed very agitated feelings , `` on such a subject I certainly will not .
You know very well that my opinion would have no weight with you , unless it were on the side of your wishes . ''
`` Indeed you wrong me , '' replied Lucy , with great solemnity ; `` I know nobody of whose judgment I think so highly as I do of yours ; and I do really believe , that if you was to say to me , ' I advise you by all means to put an end to your engagement with Edward Ferrars , it will be more for the happiness of both of you , ' I should resolve upon doing it immediately . ''
Elinor blushed for the insincerity of Edward's future wife , and replied , `` This compliment would effectually frighten me from giving any opinion on the subject had I formed one .
It raises my influence much too high ; the power of dividing two people so tenderly attached is too much for an indifferent person . ''
`` 'T is because you are an indifferent person , '' said Lucy , with some pique , and laying a particular stress on those words , '' that your judgment might justly have such weight with me .
If you could be supposed to be biased in any respect by your own feelings , your opinion would not be worth having . ''
Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this , lest they might provoke each other to an unsuitable increase of ease and unreserve ; and was even partly determined never to mention the subject again .
Another pause therefore of many minutes ' duration , succeeded this speech , and Lucy was still the first to end it .
`` Shall you be in town this winter , Miss Dashwood ? ''
said she with all her accustomary complacency .
`` Certainly not . ''
`` I am sorry for that , '' returned the other , while her eyes brightened at the information , '' it would have gave me such pleasure to meet you there !
But I dare say you will go for all that .
To be sure , your brother and sister will ask you to come to them . ''
`` It will not be in my power to accept their invitation if they do . ''
`` How unlucky that is !
I had quite depended upon meeting you there .
Anne and me are to go the latter end of January to some relations who have been wanting us to visit them these several years !
But I only go for the sake of seeing Edward .
He will be there in February , otherwise London would have no charms for me ; I have not spirits for it . ''
Elinor was soon called to the card-table by the conclusion of the first rubber , and the confidential discourse of the two ladies was therefore at an end , to which both of them submitted without any reluctance , for nothing had been said on either side to make them dislike each other less than they had done before ; and Elinor sat down to the card table with the melancholy persuasion that Edward was not only without affection for the person who was to be his wife ; but that he had not even the chance of being tolerably happy in marriage , which sincere affection on HER side would have given , for self-interest alone could induce a woman to keep a man to an engagement , of which she seemed so thoroughly aware that he was weary .
From this time the subject was never revived by Elinor , and when entered on by Lucy , who seldom missed an opportunity of introducing it , and was particularly careful to inform her confidante , of her happiness whenever she received a letter from Edward , it was treated by the former with calmness and caution , and dismissed as soon as civility would allow ; for she felt such conversations to be an indulgence which Lucy did not deserve , and which were dangerous to herself .
The visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park was lengthened far beyond what the first invitation implied .
Their favour increased ; they could not be spared ; Sir John would not hear of their going ; and in spite of their numerous and long arranged engagements in Exeter , in spite of the absolute necessity of returning to fulfill them immediately , which was in full force at the end of every week , they were prevailed on to stay nearly two months at the park , and to assist in the due celebration of that festival which requires a more than ordinary share of private balls and large dinners to proclaim its importance .
CHAPTER 25 Though Mrs .
Jennings was in the habit of spending a large portion of the year at the houses of her children and friends , she was not without a settled habitation of her own .
Since the death of her husband , who had traded with success in a less elegant part of the town , she had resided every winter in a house in one of the streets near Portman Square .
Towards this home , she began on the approach of January to turn her thoughts , and thither she one day abruptly , and very unexpectedly by them , asked the elder Misses Dashwood to accompany her .
Elinor , without observing the varying complexion of her sister , and the animated look which spoke no indifference to the plan , immediately gave a grateful but absolute denial for both , in which she believed herself to be speaking their united inclinations .
The reason alleged was their determined resolution of not leaving their mother at that time of the year .
Mrs .
Jennings received the refusal with some surprise , and repeated her invitation immediately .
`` Oh , Lord !
I am sure your mother can spare you very well , and I DO beg you will favour me with your company , for I 've quite set my heart upon it .
Do n't fancy that you will be any inconvenience to me , for I sha n't put myself at all out of my way for you .
It will only be sending Betty by the coach , and I hope I can afford THAT .
We three shall be able to go very well in my chaise ; and when we are in town , if you do not like to go wherever I do , well and good , you may always go with one of my daughters .
I am sure your mother will not object to it ; for I have had such good luck in getting my own children off my hands that she will think me a very fit person to have the charge of you ; and if I do n't get one of you at least well married before I have done with you , it shall not be my fault .
I shall speak a good word for you to all the young men , you may depend upon it . ''
`` I have a notion , '' said Sir John , `` that Miss Marianne would not object to such a scheme , if her elder sister would come into it .
It is very hard indeed that she should not have a little pleasure , because Miss Dashwood does not wish it .
So I would advise you two , to set off for town , when you are tired of Barton , without saying a word to Miss Dashwood about it . ''
`` Nay , '' cried Mrs .
Jennings , `` I am sure I shall be monstrous glad of Miss Marianne 's company , whether Miss Dashwood will go or not , only the more the merrier say I , and I thought it would be more comfortable for them to be together ; because , if they got tired of me , they might talk to one another , and laugh at my old ways behind my back .
But one or the other , if not both of them , I must have .
Lord bless me !
how do you think I can live poking by myself , I who have been always used till this winter to have Charlotte with me .
Come , Miss Marianne , let us strike hands upon the bargain , and if Miss Dashwood will change her mind by and bye , why so much the better . ''
`` I thank you , ma'am , sincerely thank you , '' said Marianne , with warmth : `` your invitation has insured my gratitude for ever , and it would give me such happiness , yes , almost the greatest happiness I am capable of , to be able to accept it .
But my mother , my dearest , kindest mother , -- I feel the justice of what Elinor has urged , and if she were to be made less happy , less comfortable by our absence -- Oh !
no , nothing should tempt me to leave her .
It should not , must not be a struggle . ''
Mrs .
Jennings repeated her assurance that Mrs .
Dashwood could spare them perfectly well ; and Elinor , who now understood her sister , and saw to what indifference to almost every thing else she was carried by her eagerness to be with Willoughby again , made no farther direct opposition to the plan , and merely referred it to her mother 's decision , from whom however she scarcely expected to receive any support in her endeavour to prevent a visit , which she could not approve of for Marianne , and which on her own account she had particular reasons to avoid .
Whatever Marianne was desirous of , her mother would be eager to promote -- she could not expect to influence the latter to cautiousness of conduct in an affair respecting which she had never been able to inspire her with distrust ; and she dared not explain the motive of her own disinclination for going to London .
That Marianne , fastidious as she was , thoroughly acquainted with Mrs .
Jennings ' manners , and invariably disgusted by them , should overlook every inconvenience of that kind , should disregard whatever must be most wounding to her irritable feelings , in her pursuit of one object , was such a proof , so strong , so full , of the importance of that object to her , as Elinor , in spite of all that had passed , was not prepared to witness .
On being informed of the invitation , Mrs .
Dashwood , persuaded that such an excursion would be productive of much amusement to both her daughters , and perceiving through all her affectionate attention to herself , how much the heart of Marianne was in it , would not hear of their declining the offer upon HER account ; insisted on their both accepting it directly ; and then began to foresee , with her usual cheerfulness , a variety of advantages that would accrue to them all , from this separation .
`` I am delighted with the plan , '' she cried , '' it is exactly what I could wish .
Margaret and I shall be as much benefited by it as yourselves .
When you and the Middletons are gone , we shall go on so quietly and happily together with our books and our music !
You will find Margaret so improved when you come back again !
I have a little plan of alteration for your bedrooms too , which may now be performed without any inconvenience to any one .
It is very right that you SHOULD go to town ; I would have every young woman of your condition in life acquainted with the manners and amusements of London .
You will be under the care of a motherly good sort of woman , of whose kindness to you I can have no doubt .
And in all probability you will see your brother , and whatever may be his faults , or the faults of his wife , when I consider whose son he is , I can not bear to have you so wholly estranged from each other . ''
`` Though with your usual anxiety for our happiness , '' said Elinor , `` you have been obviating every impediment to the present scheme which occurred to you , there is still one objection which , in my opinion , can not be so easily removed . ''
Marianne 's countenance sunk .
`` And what , '' said Mrs .
Dashwood , `` is my dear prudent Elinor going to suggest ?
What formidable obstacle is she now to bring forward ?
Do let me hear a word about the expense of it . ''
`` My objection is this ; though I think very well of Mrs .
Jennings 's heart , she is not a woman whose society can afford us pleasure , or whose protection will give us consequence . ''
`` That is very true , '' replied her mother , `` but of her society , separately from that of other people , you will scarcely have any thing at all , and you will almost always appear in public with Lady Middleton . ''
`` If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of Mrs .
Jennings , '' said Marianne , `` at least it need not prevent MY accepting her invitation .
I have no such scruples , and I am sure I could put up with every unpleasantness of that kind with very little effort . ''
Elinor could not help smiling at this display of indifference towards the manners of a person , to whom she had often had difficulty in persuading Marianne to behave with tolerable politeness ; and resolved within herself , that if her sister persisted in going , she would go likewise , as she did not think it proper that Marianne should be left to the sole guidance of her own judgment , or that Mrs .
Jennings should be abandoned to the mercy of Marianne for all the comfort of her domestic hours .
To this determination she was the more easily reconciled , by recollecting that Edward Ferrars , by Lucy 's account , was not to be in town before February ; and that their visit , without any unreasonable abridgement , might be previously finished .
`` I will have you BOTH go , '' said Mrs .
Dashwood ; '' these objections are nonsensical .
You will have much pleasure in being in London , and especially in being together ; and if Elinor would ever condescend to anticipate enjoyment , she would foresee it there from a variety of sources ; she would , perhaps , expect some from improving her acquaintance with her sister-in-law 's family . ''
Elinor had often wished for an opportunity of attempting to weaken her mother 's dependence on the attachment of Edward and herself , that the shock might be less when the whole truth were revealed , and now on this attack , though almost hopeless of success , she forced herself to begin her design by saying , as calmly as she could , `` I like Edward Ferrars very much , and shall always be glad to see him ; but as to the rest of the family , it is a matter of perfect indifference to me , whether I am ever known to them or not . ''
Mrs .
Dashwood smiled , and said nothing .
Marianne lifted up her eyes in astonishment , and Elinor conjectured that she might as well have held her tongue .
After very little farther discourse , it was finally settled that the invitation should be fully accepted .
Mrs .
Jennings received the information with a great deal of joy , and many assurances of kindness and care ; nor was it a matter of pleasure merely to her .
Sir John was delighted ; for to a man , whose prevailing anxiety was the dread of being alone , the acquisition of two , to the number of inhabitants in London , was something .
Even Lady Middleton took the trouble of being delighted , which was putting herself rather out of her way ; and as for the Miss Steeles , especially Lucy , they had never been so happy in their lives as this intelligence made them .
Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counteracted her wishes with less reluctance than she had expected to feel .
With regard to herself , it was now a matter of unconcern whether she went to town or not , and when she saw her mother so thoroughly pleased with the plan , and her sister exhilarated by it in look , voice , and manner , restored to all her usual animation , and elevated to more than her usual gaiety , she could not be dissatisfied with the cause , and would hardly allow herself to distrust the consequence .
Marianne 's joy was almost a degree beyond happiness , so great was the perturbation of her spirits and her impatience to be gone .
Her unwillingness to quit her mother was her only restorative to calmness ; and at the moment of parting her grief on that score was excessive .
Her mother 's affliction was hardly less , and Elinor was the only one of the three , who seemed to consider the separation as any thing short of eternal .
Their departure took place in the first week in January .
The Middletons were to follow in about a week .
The Miss Steeles kept their station at the park , and were to quit it only with the rest of the family .
CHAPTER 26 Elinor could not find herself in the carriage with Mrs .
Jennings , and beginning a journey to London under her protection , and as her guest , without wondering at her own situation , so short had their acquaintance with that lady been , so wholly unsuited were they in age and disposition , and so many had been her objections against such a measure only a few days before !
But these objections had all , with that happy ardour of youth which Marianne and her mother equally shared , been overcome or overlooked ; and Elinor , in spite of every occasional doubt of Willoughby 's constancy , could not witness the rapture of delightful expectation which filled the whole soul and beamed in the eyes of Marianne , without feeling how blank was her own prospect , how cheerless her own state of mind in the comparison , and how gladly she would engage in the solicitude of Marianne 's situation to have the same animating object in view , the same possibility of hope .
A short , a very short time however must now decide what Willoughby's intentions were ; in all probability he was already in town .
Marianne 's eagerness to be gone declared her dependence on finding him there ; and Elinor was resolved not only upon gaining every new light as to his character which her own observation or the intelligence of others could give her , but likewise upon watching his behaviour to her sister with such zealous attention , as to ascertain what he was and what he meant , before many meetings had taken place .
Should the result of her observations be unfavourable , she was determined at all events to open the eyes of her sister ; should it be otherwise , her exertions would be of a different nature -- she must then learn to avoid every selfish comparison , and banish every regret which might lessen her satisfaction in the happiness of Marianne .
They were three days on their journey , and Marianne's behaviour as they travelled was a happy specimen of what future complaisance and companionableness to Mrs .
Jennings might be expected to be .
She sat in silence almost all the way , wrapt in her own meditations , and scarcely ever voluntarily speaking , except when any object of picturesque beauty within their view drew from her an exclamation of delight exclusively addressed to her sister .
To atone for this conduct therefore , Elinor took immediate possession of the post of civility which she had assigned herself , behaved with the greatest attention to Mrs .
Jennings , talked with her , laughed with her , and listened to her whenever she could ; and Mrs .
Jennings on her side treated them both with all possible kindness , was solicitous on every occasion for their ease and enjoyment , and only disturbed that she could not make them choose their own dinners at the inn , nor extort a confession of their preferring salmon to cod , or boiled fowls to veal cutlets .
They reached town by three o'clock the third day , glad to be released , after such a journey , from the confinement of a carriage , and ready to enjoy all the luxury of a good fire .
The house was handsome , and handsomely fitted up , and the young ladies were immediately put in possession of a very comfortable apartment .
It had formerly been Charlotte 's , and over the mantelpiece still hung a landscape in coloured silks of her performance , in proof of her having spent seven years at a great school in town to some effect .
As dinner was not to be ready in less than two hours from their arrival , Elinor determined to employ the interval in writing to her mother , and sat down for that purpose .
In a few moments Marianne did the same .
`` I am writing home , Marianne , '' said Elinor ; `` had not you better defer your letter for a day or two ? ''
`` I am NOT going to write to my mother , '' replied Marianne , hastily , and as if wishing to avoid any farther inquiry .
Elinor said no more ; it immediately struck her that she must then be writing to Willoughby ; and the conclusion which as instantly followed was , that , however mysteriously they might wish to conduct the affair , they must be engaged .
This conviction , though not entirely satisfactory , gave her pleasure , and she continued her letter with greater alacrity .
Marianne 's was finished in a very few minutes ; in length it could be no more than a note ; it was then folded up , sealed , and directed with eager rapidity .
Elinor thought she could distinguish a large W in the direction ; and no sooner was it complete than Marianne , ringing the bell , requested the footman who answered it to get that letter conveyed for her to the two-penny post .
This decided the matter at once .
Her spirits still continued very high ; but there was a flutter in them which prevented their giving much pleasure to her sister , and this agitation increased as the evening drew on .
She could scarcely eat any dinner , and when they afterwards returned to the drawing room , seemed anxiously listening to the sound of every carriage .
It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs .
Jennings , by being much engaged in her own room , could see little of what was passing .
The tea things were brought in , and already had Marianne been disappointed more than once by a rap at a neighbouring door , when a loud one was suddenly heard which could not be mistaken for one at any other house , Elinor felt secure of its announcing Willoughby 's approach , and Marianne , starting up , moved towards the door .
Every thing was silent ; this could not be borne many seconds ; she opened the door , advanced a few steps towards the stairs , and after listening half a minute , returned into the room in all the agitation which a conviction of having heard him would naturally produce ; in the ecstasy of her feelings at that instant she could not help exclaiming , '' Oh , Elinor , it is Willoughby , indeed it is ! ''
and seemed almost ready to throw herself into his arms , when Colonel Brandon appeared .
It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness , and she immediately left the room .
Elinor was disappointed too ; but at the same time her regard for Colonel Brandon ensured his welcome with her ; and she felt particularly hurt that a man so partial to her sister should perceive that she experienced nothing but grief and disappointment in seeing him .
She instantly saw that it was not unnoticed by him , that he even observed Marianne as she quitted the room , with such astonishment and concern , as hardly left him the recollection of what civility demanded towards herself .
`` Is your sister ill ? ''
said he .
Elinor answered in some distress that she was , and then talked of head-aches , low spirits , and over fatigues ; and of every thing to which she could decently attribute her sister 's behaviour .
He heard her with the most earnest attention , but seeming to recollect himself , said no more on the subject , and began directly to speak of his pleasure at seeing them in London , making the usual inquiries about their journey , and the friends they had left behind .
In this calm kind of way , with very little interest on either side , they continued to talk , both of them out of spirits , and the thoughts of both engaged elsewhere .
Elinor wished very much to ask whether Willoughby were then in town , but she was afraid of giving him pain by any enquiry after his rival ; and at length , by way of saying something , she asked if he had been in London ever since she had seen him last .
`` Yes , '' he replied , with some embarrassment , `` almost ever since ; I have been once or twice at Delaford for a few days , but it has never been in my power to return to Barton . ''
This , and the manner in which it was said , immediately brought back to her remembrance all the circumstances of his quitting that place , with the uneasiness and suspicions they had caused to Mrs .
Jennings , and she was fearful that her question had implied much more curiosity on the subject than she had ever felt .
Mrs .
Jennings soon came in .
`` Oh !
Colonel , '' said she , with her usual noisy cheerfulness , `` I am monstrous glad to see you -- sorry I could not come before -- beg your pardon , but I have been forced to look about me a little , and settle my matters ; for it is a long while since I have been at home , and you know one has always a world of little odd things to do after one has been away for any time ; and then I have had Cartwright to settle with -- Lord , I have been as busy as a bee ever since dinner !
But pray , Colonel , how came you to conjure out that I should be in town today ? ''
`` I had the pleasure of hearing it at Mr .
Palmer 's , where I have been dining . ''
`` Oh , you did ; well , and how do they all do at their house ?
How does Charlotte do ?
I warrant you she is a fine size by this time . ''
`` Mrs .
Palmer appeared quite well , and I am commissioned to tell you , that you will certainly see her to-morrow . ''
`` Ay , to be sure , I thought as much .
Well , Colonel , I have brought two young ladies with me , you see -- that is , you see but one of them now , but there is another somewhere .
Your friend , Miss Marianne , too -- which you will not be sorry to hear .
I do not know what you and Mr .
Willoughby will do between you about her .
Ay , it is a fine thing to be young and handsome .
Well !
I was young once , but I never was very handsome -- worse luck for me .
However , I got a very good husband , and I do n't know what the greatest beauty can do more .
Ah !
poor man !
he has been dead these eight years and better .
But Colonel , where have you been to since we parted ?
And how does your business go on ?
Come , come , let 's have no secrets among friends . ''
He replied with his accustomary mildness to all her inquiries , but without satisfying her in any .
Elinor now began to make the tea , and Marianne was obliged to appear again .
After her entrance , Colonel Brandon became more thoughtful and silent than he had been before , and Mrs .
Jennings could not prevail on him to stay long .
No other visitor appeared that evening , and the ladies were unanimous in agreeing to go early to bed .
Marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits and happy looks .
The disappointment of the evening before seemed forgotten in the expectation of what was to happen that day .
They had not long finished their breakfast before Mrs .
Palmer 's barouche stopped at the door , and in a few minutes she came laughing into the room : so delighted to see them all , that it was hard to say whether she received most pleasure from meeting her mother or the Miss Dashwoods again .
So surprised at their coming to town , though it was what she had rather expected all along ; so angry at their accepting her mother 's invitation after having declined her own , though at the same time she would never have forgiven them if they had not come !
`` Mr .
Palmer will be so happy to see you , '' said she ; `` What do you think he said when he heard of your coming with Mamma ?
I forget what it was now , but it was something so droll ! ''
After an hour or two spent in what her mother called comfortable chat , or in other words , in every variety of inquiry concerning all their acquaintance on Mrs .
Jennings 's side , and in laughter without cause on Mrs .
Palmer 's , it was proposed by the latter that they should all accompany her to some shops where she had business that morning , to which Mrs .
Jennings and Elinor readily consented , as having likewise some purchases to make themselves ; and Marianne , though declining it at first was induced to go likewise .
Wherever they went , she was evidently always on the watch .
In Bond Street especially , where much of their business lay , her eyes were in constant inquiry ; and in whatever shop the party were engaged , her mind was equally abstracted from every thing actually before them , from all that interested and occupied the others .
Restless and dissatisfied every where , her sister could never obtain her opinion of any article of purchase , however it might equally concern them both : she received no pleasure from anything ; was only impatient to be at home again , and could with difficulty govern her vexation at the tediousness of Mrs .
Palmer , whose eye was caught by every thing pretty , expensive , or new ; who was wild to buy all , could determine on none , and dawdled away her time in rapture and indecision .
It was late in the morning before they returned home ; and no sooner had they entered the house than Marianne flew eagerly up stairs , and when Elinor followed , she found her turning from the table with a sorrowful countenance , which declared that no Willoughby had been there .
`` Has no letter been left here for me since we went out ? ''
said she to the footman who then entered with the parcels .
She was answered in the negative .
`` Are you quite sure of it ? ''
she replied .
`` Are you certain that no servant , no porter has left any letter or note ? ''
The man replied that none had .
`` How very odd ! ''
said she , in a low and disappointed voice , as she turned away to the window .
`` How odd , indeed ! ''
repeated Elinor within herself , regarding her sister with uneasiness .
`` If she had not known him to be in town she would not have written to him , as she did ; she would have written to Combe Magna ; and if he is in town , how odd that he should neither come nor write !
Oh !
my dear mother , you must be wrong in permitting an engagement between a daughter so young , a man so little known , to be carried on in so doubtful , so mysterious a manner !
I long to inquire ; and how will MY interference be borne . ''
She determined , after some consideration , that if appearances continued many days longer as unpleasant as they now were , she would represent in the strongest manner to her mother the necessity of some serious enquiry into the affair .
Mrs .
Palmer and two elderly ladies of Mrs .
Jennings's intimate acquaintance , whom she had met and invited in the morning , dined with them .
The former left them soon after tea to fulfill her evening engagements ; and Elinor was obliged to assist in making a whist table for the others .
Marianne was of no use on these occasions , as she would never learn the game ; but though her time was therefore at her own disposal , the evening was by no means more productive of pleasure to her than to Elinor , for it was spent in all the anxiety of expectation and the pain of disappointment .
She sometimes endeavoured for a few minutes to read ; but the book was soon thrown aside , and she returned to the more interesting employment of walking backwards and forwards across the room , pausing for a moment whenever she came to the window , in hopes of distinguishing the long-expected rap .
CHAPTER 27 '' If this open weather holds much longer , '' said Mrs .
Jennings , when they met at breakfast the following morning , '' Sir John will not like leaving Barton next week ; 'tis a sad thing for sportsmen to lose a day 's pleasure .
Poor souls !
I always pity them when they do ; they seem to take it so much to heart . ''
`` That is true , '' cried Marianne , in a cheerful voice , and walking to the window as she spoke , to examine the day .
`` I had not thought of that .
This weather will keep many sportsmen in the country . ''
It was a lucky recollection , all her good spirits were restored by it .
`` It is charming weather for THEM indeed , '' she continued , as she sat down to the breakfast table with a happy countenance .
`` How much they must enjoy it !
But '' ( with a little return of anxiety ) `` it can not be expected to last long .
At this time of the year , and after such a series of rain , we shall certainly have very little more of it .
Frosts will soon set in , and in all probability with severity .
In another day or two perhaps ; this extreme mildness can hardly last longer -- nay , perhaps it may freeze tonight ! ''
`` At any rate , '' said Elinor , wishing to prevent Mrs .
Jennings from seeing her sister 's thoughts as clearly as she did , `` I dare say we shall have Sir John and Lady Middleton in town by the end of next week . ''
`` Ay , my dear , I 'll warrant you we do .
Mary always has her own way . ''
`` And now , '' silently conjectured Elinor , `` she will write to Combe by this day 's post . ''
But if she DID , the letter was written and sent away with a privacy which eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the fact .
Whatever the truth of it might be , and far as Elinor was from feeling thorough contentment about it , yet while she saw Marianne in spirits , she could not be very uncomfortable herself .
And Marianne was in spirits ; happy in the mildness of the weather , and still happier in her expectation of a frost .
The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cards at the houses of Mrs .
Jennings 's acquaintance to inform them of her being in town ; and Marianne was all the time busy in observing the direction of the wind , watching the variations of the sky and imagining an alteration in the air .
`` Do n't you find it colder than it was in the morning , Elinor ?
There seems to me a very decided difference .
I can hardly keep my hands warm even in my muff .
It was not so yesterday , I think .
The clouds seem parting too , the sun will be out in a moment , and we shall have a clear afternoon . ''
Elinor was alternately diverted and pained ; but Marianne persevered , and saw every night in the brightness of the fire , and every morning in the appearance of the atmosphere , the certain symptoms of approaching frost .
The Miss Dashwoods had no greater reason to be dissatisfied with Mrs .
Jennings 's style of living , and set of acquaintance , than with her behaviour to themselves , which was invariably kind .
Every thing in her household arrangements was conducted on the most liberal plan , and excepting a few old city friends , whom , to Lady Middleton 's regret , she had never dropped , she visited no one to whom an introduction could at all discompose the feelings of her young companions .
Pleased to find herself more comfortably situated in that particular than she had expected , Elinor was very willing to compound for the want of much real enjoyment from any of their evening parties , which , whether at home or abroad , formed only for cards , could have little to amuse her .
Colonel Brandon , who had a general invitation to the house , was with them almost every day ; he came to look at Marianne and talk to Elinor , who often derived more satisfaction from conversing with him than from any other daily occurrence , but who saw at the same time with much concern his continued regard for her sister .
She feared it was a strengthening regard .
It grieved her to see the earnestness with which he often watched Marianne , and his spirits were certainly worse than when at Barton .
About a week after their arrival , it became certain that Willoughby was also arrived .
His card was on the table when they came in from the morning 's drive .
`` Good God ! ''
cried Marianne , `` he has been here while we were out . ''
Elinor , rejoiced to be assured of his being in London , now ventured to say , `` Depend upon it , he will call again tomorrow . ''
But Marianne seemed hardly to hear her , and on Mrs .
Jenning 's entrance , escaped with the precious card .
This event , while it raised the spirits of Elinor , restored to those of her sister all , and more than all , their former agitation .
From this moment her mind was never quiet ; the expectation of seeing him every hour of the day , made her unfit for any thing .
She insisted on being left behind , the next morning , when the others went out .
Elinor 's thoughts were full of what might be passing in Berkeley Street during their absence ; but a moment's glance at her sister when they returned was enough to inform her , that Willoughby had paid no second visit there .
A note was just then brought in , and laid on the table , '' For me ! ''
cried Marianne , stepping hastily forward .
`` No , ma'am , for my mistress . ''
But Marianne , not convinced , took it instantly up .
`` It is indeed for Mrs .
Jennings ; how provoking ! ''
`` You are expecting a letter , then ? ''
said Elinor , unable to be longer silent .
`` Yes , a little -- not much . ''
After a short pause .
`` You have no confidence in me , Marianne . ''
`` Nay , Elinor , this reproach from YOU -- you who have confidence in no one ! ''
`` Me ! ''
returned Elinor in some confusion ; `` indeed , Marianne , I have nothing to tell . ''
`` Nor I , '' answered Marianne with energy , `` our situations then are alike .
We have neither of us any thing to tell ; you , because you do not communicate , and I , because I conceal nothing . ''
Elinor , distressed by this charge of reserve in herself , which she was not at liberty to do away , knew not how , under such circumstances , to press for greater openness in Marianne .
Mrs .
Jennings soon appeared , and the note being given her , she read it aloud .
It was from Lady Middleton , announcing their arrival in Conduit Street the night before , and requesting the company of her mother and cousins the following evening .
Business on Sir John 's part , and a violent cold on her own , prevented their calling in Berkeley Street .
The invitation was accepted ; but when the hour of appointment drew near , necessary as it was in common civility to Mrs .
Jennings , that they should both attend her on such a visit , Elinor had some difficulty in persuading her sister to go , for still she had seen nothing of Willoughby ; and therefore was not more indisposed for amusement abroad , than unwilling to run the risk of his calling again in her absence .
Elinor found , when the evening was over , that disposition is not materially altered by a change of abode , for although scarcely settled in town , Sir John had contrived to collect around him , nearly twenty young people , and to amuse them with a ball .
This was an affair , however , of which Lady Middleton did not approve .
In the country , an unpremeditated dance was very allowable ; but in London , where the reputation of elegance was more important and less easily attained , it was risking too much for the gratification of a few girls , to have it known that Lady Middleton had given a small dance of eight or nine couple , with two violins , and a mere side-board collation .
Mr .
and Mrs .
Palmer were of the party ; from the former , whom they had not seen before since their arrival in town , as he was careful to avoid the appearance of any attention to his mother-in-law , and therefore never came near her , they received no mark of recognition on their entrance .
He looked at them slightly , without seeming to know who they were , and merely nodded to Mrs .
Jennings from the other side of the room .
Marianne gave one glance round the apartment as she entered : it was enough -- HE was not there -- and she sat down , equally ill-disposed to receive or communicate pleasure .
After they had been assembled about an hour , Mr .
Palmer sauntered towards the Miss Dashwoods to express his surprise on seeing them in town , though Colonel Brandon had been first informed of their arrival at his house , and he had himself said something very droll on hearing that they were to come .
`` I thought you were both in Devonshire , '' said he .
`` Did you ? ''
replied Elinor .
`` When do you go back again ? ''
`` I do not know . ''
And thus ended their discourse .
Never had Marianne been so unwilling to dance in her life , as she was that evening , and never so much fatigued by the exercise .
She complained of it as they returned to Berkeley Street .
`` Aye , aye , '' said Mrs .
Jennings , `` we know the reason of all that very well ; if a certain person who shall be nameless , had been there , you would not have been a bit tired : and to say the truth it was not very pretty of him not to give you the meeting when he was invited . ''
`` Invited ! ''
cried Marianne .
`` So my daughter Middleton told me , for it seems Sir John met him somewhere in the street this morning . ''
Marianne said no more , but looked exceedingly hurt .
Impatient in this situation to be doing something that might lead to her sister 's relief , Elinor resolved to write the next morning to her mother , and hoped by awakening her fears for the health of Marianne , to procure those inquiries which had been so long delayed ; and she was still more eagerly bent on this measure by perceiving after breakfast on the morrow , that Marianne was again writing to Willoughby , for she could not suppose it to be to any other person .
About the middle of the day , Mrs .
Jennings went out by herself on business , and Elinor began her letter directly , while Marianne , too restless for employment , too anxious for conversation , walked from one window to the other , or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation .
Elinor was very earnest in her application to her mother , relating all that had passed , her suspicions of Willoughby 's inconstancy , urging her by every plea of duty and affection to demand from Marianne an account of her real situation with respect to him .
Her letter was scarcely finished , when a rap foretold a visitor , and Colonel Brandon was announced .
Marianne , who had seen him from the window , and who hated company of any kind , left the room before he entered it .
He looked more than usually grave , and though expressing satisfaction at finding Miss Dashwood alone , as if he had somewhat in particular to tell her , sat for some time without saying a word .
Elinor , persuaded that he had some communication to make in which her sister was concerned , impatiently expected its opening .
It was not the first time of her feeling the same kind of conviction ; for , more than once before , beginning with the observation of `` your sister looks unwell to-day , '' or `` your sister seems out of spirits , '' he had appeared on the point , either of disclosing , or of inquiring , something particular about her .
After a pause of several minutes , their silence was broken , by his asking her in a voice of some agitation , when he was to congratulate her on the acquisition of a brother ?
Elinor was not prepared for such a question , and having no answer ready , was obliged to adopt the simple and common expedient , of asking what he meant ?
He tried to smile as he replied , '' your sister 's engagement to Mr .
Willoughby is very generally known . ''
`` It can not be generally known , '' returned Elinor , '' for her own family do not know it . ''
He looked surprised and said , `` I beg your pardon , I am afraid my inquiry has been impertinent ; but I had not supposed any secrecy intended , as they openly correspond , and their marriage is universally talked of . ''
`` How can that be ?
By whom can you have heard it mentioned ? ''
`` By many -- by some of whom you know nothing , by others with whom you are most intimate , Mrs .
Jennings , Mrs .
Palmer , and the Middletons .
But still I might not have believed it , for where the mind is perhaps rather unwilling to be convinced , it will always find something to support its doubts , if I had not , when the servant let me in today , accidentally seen a letter in his hand , directed to Mr .
Willoughby in your sister 's writing .
I came to inquire , but I was convinced before I could ask the question .
Is every thing finally settled ?
Is it impossible to- ?
But I have no right , and I could have no chance of succeeding .
Excuse me , Miss Dashwood .
I believe I have been wrong in saying so much , but I hardly know what to do , and on your prudence I have the strongest dependence .
Tell me that it is all absolutely resolved on , that any attempt , that in short concealment , if concealment be possible , is all that remains . ''
These words , which conveyed to Elinor a direct avowal of his love for her sister , affected her very much .
She was not immediately able to say anything , and even when her spirits were recovered , she debated for a short time , on the answer it would be most proper to give .
The real state of things between Willoughby and her sister was so little known to herself , that in endeavouring to explain it , she might be as liable to say too much as too little .
Yet as she was convinced that Marianne's affection for Willoughby , could leave no hope of Colonel Brandon 's success , whatever the event of that affection might be , and at the same time wished to shield her conduct from censure , she thought it most prudent and kind , after some consideration , to say more than she really knew or believed .
She acknowledged , therefore , that though she had never been informed by themselves of the terms on which they stood with each other , of their mutual affection she had no doubt , and of their correspondence she was not astonished to hear .
He listened to her with silent attention , and on her ceasing to speak , rose directly from his seat , and after saying in a voice of emotion , `` to your sister I wish all imaginable happiness ; to Willoughby that he may endeavour to deserve her , '' -- took leave , and went away .
Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this conversation , to lessen the uneasiness of her mind on other points ; she was left , on the contrary , with a melancholy impression of Colonel Brandon 's unhappiness , and was prevented even from wishing it removed , by her anxiety for the very event that must confirm it .
CHAPTER 28 Nothing occurred during the next three or four days , to make Elinor regret what she had done , in applying to her mother ; for Willoughby neither came nor wrote .
They were engaged about the end of that time to attend Lady Middleton to a party , from which Mrs .
Jennings was kept away by the indisposition of her youngest daughter ; and for this party , Marianne , wholly dispirited , careless of her appearance , and seeming equally indifferent whether she went or staid , prepared , without one look of hope or one expression of pleasure .
She sat by the drawing-room fire after tea , till the moment of Lady Middleton 's arrival , without once stirring from her seat , or altering her attitude , lost in her own thoughts , and insensible of her sister 's presence ; and when at last they were told that Lady Middleton waited for them at the door , she started as if she had forgotten that any one was expected .
They arrived in due time at the place of destination , and as soon as the string of carriages before them would allow , alighted , ascended the stairs , heard their names announced from one landing-place to another in an audible voice , and entered a room splendidly lit up , quite full of company , and insufferably hot .
When they had paid their tribute of politeness by curtsying to the lady of the house , they were permitted to mingle in the crowd , and take their share of the heat and inconvenience , to which their arrival must necessarily add .
After some time spent in saying little or doing less , Lady Middleton sat down to Cassino , and as Marianne was not in spirits for moving about , she and Elinor luckily succeeding to chairs , placed themselves at no great distance from the table .
They had not remained in this manner long , before Elinor perceived Willoughby , standing within a few yards of them , in earnest conversation with a very fashionable looking young woman .
She soon caught his eye , and he immediately bowed , but without attempting to speak to her , or to approach Marianne , though he could not but see her ; and then continued his discourse with the same lady .
Elinor turned involuntarily to Marianne , to see whether it could be unobserved by her .
At that moment she first perceived him , and her whole countenance glowing with sudden delight , she would have moved towards him instantly , had not her sister caught hold of her .
`` Good heavens ! ''
she exclaimed , `` he is there -- he is there -- Oh !
why does he not look at me ?
why can not I speak to him ? ''
`` Pray , pray be composed , '' cried Elinor , `` and do not betray what you feel to every body present .
Perhaps he has not observed you yet . ''
This however was more than she could believe herself ; and to be composed at such a moment was not only beyond the reach of Marianne , it was beyond her wish .
She sat in an agony of impatience which affected every feature .
At last he turned round again , and regarded them both ; she started up , and pronouncing his name in a tone of affection , held out her hand to him .
He approached , and addressing himself rather to Elinor than Marianne , as if wishing to avoid her eye , and determined not to observe her attitude , inquired in a hurried manner after Mrs .
Dashwood , and asked how long they had been in town .
Elinor was robbed of all presence of mind by such an address , and was unable to say a word .
But the feelings of her sister were instantly expressed .
Her face was crimsoned over , and she exclaimed , in a voice of the greatest emotion , '' Good God !
Willoughby , what is the meaning of this ?
Have you not received my letters ?
Will you not shake hands with me ? ''
He could not then avoid it , but her touch seemed painful to him , and he held her hand only for a moment .
During all this time he was evidently struggling for composure .
Elinor watched his countenance and saw its expression becoming more tranquil .
After a moment 's pause , he spoke with calmness .
`` I did myself the honour of calling in Berkeley Street last Tuesday , and very much regretted that I was not fortunate enough to find yourselves and Mrs .
Jennings at home .
My card was not lost , I hope . ''
`` But have you not received my notes ? ''
cried Marianne in the wildest anxiety .
`` Here is some mistake I am sure -- some dreadful mistake .
What can be the meaning of it ?
Tell me , Willoughby ; for heaven 's sake tell me , what is the matter ? ''
He made no reply ; his complexion changed and all his embarrassment returned ; but as if , on catching the eye of the young lady with whom he had been previously talking , he felt the necessity of instant exertion , he recovered himself again , and after saying , `` Yes , I had the pleasure of receiving the information of your arrival in town , which you were so good as to send me , '' turned hastily away with a slight bow and joined his friend .
Marianne , now looking dreadfully white , and unable to stand , sunk into her chair , and Elinor , expecting every moment to see her faint , tried to screen her from the observation of others , while reviving her with lavender water .
`` Go to him , Elinor , '' she cried , as soon as she could speak , `` and force him to come to me .
Tell him I must see him again -- must speak to him instantly. -- I can not rest -- I shall not have a moment 's peace till this is explained -- some dreadful misapprehension or other. -- Oh go to him this moment . ''
`` How can that be done ?
No , my dearest Marianne , you must wait .
This is not the place for explanations .
Wait only till tomorrow . ''
With difficulty however could she prevent her from following him herself ; and to persuade her to check her agitation , to wait , at least , with the appearance of composure , till she might speak to him with more privacy and more effect , was impossible ; for Marianne continued incessantly to give way in a low voice to the misery of her feelings , by exclamations of wretchedness .
In a short time Elinor saw Willoughby quit the room by the door towards the staircase , and telling Marianne that he was gone , urged the impossibility of speaking to him again that evening , as a fresh argument for her to be calm .
She instantly begged her sister would entreat Lady Middleton to take them home , as she was too miserable to stay a minute longer .
Lady Middleton , though in the middle of a rubber , on being informed that Marianne was unwell , was too polite to object for a moment to her wish of going away , and making over her cards to a friend , they departed as soon the carriage could be found .
Scarcely a word was spoken during their return to Berkeley Street .
Marianne was in a silent agony , too much oppressed even for tears ; but as Mrs .
Jennings was luckily not come home , they could go directly to their own room , where hartshorn restored her a little to herself .
She was soon undressed and in bed , and as she seemed desirous of being alone , her sister then left her , and while she waited the return of Mrs .
Jennings , had leisure enough for thinking over the past .
That some kind of engagement had subsisted between Willoughby and Marianne she could not doubt , and that Willoughby was weary of it , seemed equally clear ; for however Marianne might still feed her own wishes , SHE could not attribute such behaviour to mistake or misapprehension of any kind .
Nothing but a thorough change of sentiment could account for it .
Her indignation would have been still stronger than it was , had she not witnessed that embarrassment which seemed to speak a consciousness of his own misconduct , and prevented her from believing him so unprincipled as to have been sporting with the affections of her sister from the first , without any design that would bear investigation .
Absence might have weakened his regard , and convenience might have determined him to overcome it , but that such a regard had formerly existed she could not bring herself to doubt .
As for Marianne , on the pangs which so unhappy a meeting must already have given her , and on those still more severe which might await her in its probable consequence , she could not reflect without the deepest concern .
Her own situation gained in the comparison ; for while she could ESTEEM Edward as much as ever , however they might be divided in future , her mind might be always supported .
But every circumstance that could embitter such an evil seemed uniting to heighten the misery of Marianne in a final separation from Willoughby -- in an immediate and irreconcilable rupture with him .
CHAPTER 29 Before the house-maid had lit their fire the next day , or the sun gained any power over a cold , gloomy morning in January , Marianne , only half dressed , was kneeling against one of the window-seats for the sake of all the little light she could command from it , and writing as fast as a continual flow of tears would permit her .
In this situation , Elinor , roused from sleep by her agitation and sobs , first perceived her ; and after observing her for a few moments with silent anxiety , said , in a tone of the most considerate gentleness , '' Marianne , may I ask- ? ''
`` No , Elinor , '' she replied , `` ask nothing ; you will soon know all . ''
The sort of desperate calmness with which this was said , lasted no longer than while she spoke , and was immediately followed by a return of the same excessive affliction .
It was some minutes before she could go on with her letter , and the frequent bursts of grief which still obliged her , at intervals , to withhold her pen , were proofs enough of her feeling how more than probable it was that she was writing for the last time to Willoughby .
Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtrusive attention in her power ; and she would have tried to sooth and tranquilize her still more , had not Marianne entreated her , with all the eagerness of the most nervous irritability , not to speak to her for the world .
In such circumstances , it was better for both that they should not be long together ; and the restless state of Marianne 's mind not only prevented her from remaining in the room a moment after she was dressed , but requiring at once solitude and continual change of place , made her wander about the house till breakfast time , avoiding the sight of every body .
At breakfast she neither ate , nor attempted to eat any thing ; and Elinor 's attention was then all employed , not in urging her , not in pitying her , nor in appearing to regard her , but in endeavouring to engage Mrs .
Jenning's notice entirely to herself .
As this was a favourite meal with Mrs .
Jennings , it lasted a considerable time , and they were just setting themselves , after it , round the common working table , when a letter was delivered to Marianne , which she eagerly caught from the servant , and , turning of a death-like paleness , instantly ran out of the room .
Elinor , who saw as plainly by this , as if she had seen the direction , that it must come from Willoughby , felt immediately such a sickness at heart as made her hardly able to hold up her head , and sat in such a general tremour as made her fear it impossible to escape Mrs .
Jenning 's notice .
That good lady , however , saw only that Marianne had received a letter from Willoughby , which appeared to her a very good joke , and which she treated accordingly , by hoping , with a laugh , that she would find it to her liking .
Of Elinor 's distress , she was too busily employed in measuring lengths of worsted for her rug , to see any thing at all ; and calmly continuing her talk , as soon as Marianne disappeared , she said , '' Upon my word , I never saw a young woman so desperately in love in my life !
MY girls were nothing to her , and yet they used to be foolish enough ; but as for Miss Marianne , she is quite an altered creature .
I hope , from the bottom of my heart , he wo n't keep her waiting much longer , for it is quite grievous to see her look so ill and forlorn .
Pray , when are they to be married ? ''
Elinor , though never less disposed to speak than at that moment , obliged herself to answer such an attack as this , and , therefore , trying to smile , replied , `` And have you really , Ma'am , talked yourself into a persuasion of my sister 's being engaged to Mr .
Willoughby ?
I thought it had been only a joke , but so serious a question seems to imply more ; and I must beg , therefore , that you will not deceive yourself any longer .
I do assure you that nothing would surprise me more than to hear of their being going to be married . ''
`` For shame , for shame , Miss Dashwood !
how can you talk so ?
Do n't we all know that it must be a match , that they were over head and ears in love with each other from the first moment they met ?
Did not I see them together in Devonshire every day , and all day long ; and did not I know that your sister came to town with me on purpose to buy wedding clothes ?
Come , come , this wo n't do .
Because you are so sly about it yourself , you think nobody else has any senses ; but it is no such thing , I can tell you , for it has been known all over town this ever so long .
I tell every body of it and so does Charlotte . ''
`` Indeed , Ma'am , '' said Elinor , very seriously , '' you are mistaken .
Indeed , you are doing a very unkind thing in spreading the report , and you will find that you have though you will not believe me now . ''
Mrs .
Jennings laughed again , but Elinor had not spirits to say more , and eager at all events to know what Willoughby had written , hurried away to their room , where , on opening the door , she saw Marianne stretched on the bed , almost choked by grief , one letter in her hand , and two or three others laying by her .
Elinor drew near , but without saying a word ; and seating herself on the bed , took her hand , kissed her affectionately several times , and then gave way to a burst of tears , which at first was scarcely less violent than Marianne 's .
The latter , though unable to speak , seemed to feel all the tenderness of this behaviour , and after some time thus spent in joint affliction , she put all the letters into Elinor 's hands ; and then covering her face with her handkerchief , almost screamed with agony .
Elinor , who knew that such grief , shocking as it was to witness it , must have its course , watched by her till this excess of suffering had somewhat spent itself , and then turning eagerly to Willoughby 's letter , read as follows : `` Bond Street , January .
`` MY DEAR MADAM , `` I have just had the honour of receiving your letter , for which I beg to return my sincere acknowledgments .
I am much concerned to find there was anything in my behaviour last night that did not meet your approbation ; and though I am quite at a loss to discover in what point I could be so unfortunate as to offend you , I entreat your forgiveness of what I can assure you to have been perfectly unintentional .
I shall never reflect on my former acquaintance with your family in Devonshire without the most grateful pleasure , and flatter myself it will not be broken by any mistake or misapprehension of my actions .
My esteem for your whole family is very sincere ; but if I have been so unfortunate as to give rise to a belief of more than I felt , or meant to express , I shall reproach myself for not having been more guarded in my professions of that esteem .
That I should ever have meant more you will allow to be impossible , when you understand that my affections have been long engaged elsewhere , and it will not be many weeks , I believe , before this engagement is fulfilled .
It is with great regret that I obey your commands in returning the letters with which I have been honoured from you , and the lock of hair , which you so obligingly bestowed on me .
`` I am , dear Madam , `` Your most obedient `` humble servant , `` JOHN WILLOUGHBY . ''
With what indignation such a letter as this must be read by Miss Dashwood , may be imagined .
Though aware , before she began it , that it must bring a confession of his inconstancy , and confirm their separation for ever , she was not aware that such language could be suffered to announce it ; nor could she have supposed Willoughby capable of departing so far from the appearance of every honourable and delicate feeling -- so far from the common decorum of a gentleman , as to send a letter so impudently cruel : a letter which , instead of bringing with his desire of a release any professions of regret , acknowledged no breach of faith , denied all peculiar affection whatever -- a letter of which every line was an insult , and which proclaimed its writer to be deep in hardened villainy .
She paused over it for some time with indignant astonishment ; then read it again and again ; but every perusal only served to increase her abhorrence of the man , and so bitter were her feelings against him , that she dared not trust herself to speak , lest she might wound Marianne still deeper by treating their disengagement , not as a loss to her of any possible good but as an escape from the worst and most irremediable of all evils , a connection , for life , with an unprincipled man , as a deliverance the most real , a blessing the most important .
In her earnest meditations on the contents of the letter , on the depravity of that mind which could dictate it , and probably , on the very different mind of a very different person , who had no other connection whatever with the affair than what her heart gave him with every thing that passed , Elinor forgot the immediate distress of her sister , forgot that she had three letters on her lap yet unread , and so entirely forgot how long she had been in the room , that when on hearing a carriage drive up to the door , she went to the window to see who could be coming so unreasonably early , she was all astonishment to perceive Mrs .
Jennings 's chariot , which she knew had not been ordered till one .
Determined not to quit Marianne , though hopeless of contributing , at present , to her ease , she hurried away to excuse herself from attending Mrs .
Jennings , on account of her sister being indisposed .
Mrs .
Jennings , with a thoroughly good-humoured concern for its cause , admitted the excuse most readily , and Elinor , after seeing her safe off , returned to Marianne , whom she found attempting to rise from the bed , and whom she reached just in time to prevent her from falling on the floor , faint and giddy from a long want of proper rest and food ; for it was many days since she had any appetite , and many nights since she had really slept ; and now , when her mind was no longer supported by the fever of suspense , the consequence of all this was felt in an aching head , a weakened stomach , and a general nervous faintness .
A glass of wine , which Elinor procured for her directly , made her more comfortable , and she was at last able to express some sense of her kindness , by saying , '' Poor Elinor !
how unhappy I make you ! ''
`` I only wish , '' replied her sister , `` there were any thing I COULD do , which might be of comfort to you . ''
This , as every thing else would have been , was too much for Marianne , who could only exclaim , in the anguish of her heart , `` Oh !
Elinor , I am miserable , indeed , '' before her voice was entirely lost in sobs .
Elinor could no longer witness this torrent of unresisted grief in silence .
`` Exert yourself , dear Marianne , '' she cried , '' if you would not kill yourself and all who love you .
Think of your mother ; think of her misery while YOU suffer : for her sake you must exert yourself . ''
`` I can not , I can not , '' cried Marianne ; `` leave me , leave me , if I distress you ; leave me , hate me , forget me !
but do not torture me so .
Oh !
how easy for those , who have no sorrow of their own to talk of exertion !
Happy , happy Elinor , YOU can not have an idea of what I suffer . ''
`` Do you call ME happy , Marianne ?
Ah !
if you knew ! -- And can you believe me to be so , while I see you so wretched ! ''
`` Forgive me , forgive me , '' throwing her arms round her sister 's neck ; `` I know you feel for me ; I know what a heart you have ; but yet you are -- you must be happy ; Edward loves you -- what , oh what , can do away such happiness as that ? ''
`` Many , many circumstances , '' said Elinor , solemnly .
`` No , no , no , '' cried Marianne wildly , `` he loves you , and only you .
You CAN have no grief . ''
`` I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state . ''
`` And you will never see me otherwise .
Mine is a misery which nothing can do away . ''
`` You must not talk so , Marianne .
Have you no comforts ?
no friends ?
Is your loss such as leaves no opening for consolation ?
Much as you suffer now , think of what you would have suffered if the discovery of his character had been delayed to a later period -- if your engagement had been carried on for months and months , as it might have been , before he chose to put an end to it .
Every additional day of unhappy confidence , on your side , would have made the blow more dreadful . ''
`` Engagement ! ''
cried Marianne , `` there has been no engagement . ''
`` No engagement ! ''
`` No , he is not so unworthy as you believe him .
He has broken no faith with me . ''
`` But he told you that he loved you . ''
`` Yes -- no -- never absolutely .
It was every day implied , but never professedly declared .
Sometimes I thought it had been -- but it never was . ''
`` Yet you wrote to him ? ''
-- '' Yes -- could that be wrong after all that had passed ? -- But I can not talk . ''
Elinor said no more , and turning again to the three letters which now raised a much stronger curiosity than before , directly ran over the contents of all .
The first , which was what her sister had sent him on their arrival in town , was to this effect .
Berkeley Street , January .
`` How surprised you will be , Willoughby , on receiving this ; and I think you will feel something more than surprise , when you know that I am in town .
An opportunity of coming hither , though with Mrs .
Jennings , was a temptation we could not resist .
I wish you may receive this in time to come here to-night , but I will not depend on it .
At any rate I shall expect you to-morrow .
For the present , adieu .
`` M.D . ''
Her second note , which had been written on the morning after the dance at the Middletons ' , was in these words : -- `` I can not express my disappointment in having missed you the day before yesterday , nor my astonishment at not having received any answer to a note which I sent you above a week ago .
I have been expecting to hear from you , and still more to see you , every hour of the day .
Pray call again as soon as possible , and explain the reason of my having expected this in vain .
You had better come earlier another time , because we are generally out by one .
We were last night at Lady Middleton 's , where there was a dance .
I have been told that you were asked to be of the party .
But could it be so ?
You must be very much altered indeed since we parted , if that could be the case , and you not there .
But I will not suppose this possible , and I hope very soon to receive your personal assurance of its being otherwise .
`` M.D . ''
The contents of her last note to him were these : -- `` What am I to imagine , Willoughby , by your behaviour last night ?
Again I demand an explanation of it .
I was prepared to meet you with the pleasure which our separation naturally produced , with the familiarity which our intimacy at Barton appeared to me to justify .
I was repulsed indeed !
I have passed a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse a conduct which can scarcely be called less than insulting ; but though I have not yet been able to form any reasonable apology for your behaviour , I am perfectly ready to hear your justification of it .
You have perhaps been misinformed , or purposely deceived , in something concerning me , which may have lowered me in your opinion .
Tell me what it is , explain the grounds on which you acted , and I shall be satisfied , in being able to satisfy you .
It would grieve me indeed to be obliged to think ill of you ; but if I am to do it , if I am to learn that you are not what we have hitherto believed you , that your regard for us all was insincere , that your behaviour to me was intended only to deceive , let it be told as soon as possible .
My feelings are at present in a state of dreadful indecision ; I wish to acquit you , but certainty on either side will be ease to what I now suffer .
If your sentiments are no longer what they were , you will return my notes , and the lock of my hair which is in your possession .
`` M.D . ''
That such letters , so full of affection and confidence , could have been so answered , Elinor , for Willoughby 's sake , would have been unwilling to believe .
But her condemnation of him did not blind her to the impropriety of their having been written at all ; and she was silently grieving over the imprudence which had hazarded such unsolicited proofs of tenderness , not warranted by anything preceding , and most severely condemned by the event , when Marianne , perceiving that she had finished the letters , observed to her that they contained nothing but what any one would have written in the same situation .
`` I felt myself , '' she added , `` to be as solemnly engaged to him , as if the strictest legal covenant had bound us to each other . ''
`` I can believe it , '' said Elinor ; `` but unfortunately he did not feel the same . ''
`` He DID feel the same , Elinor -- for weeks and weeks he felt it .
I know he did .
Whatever may have changed him now , ( and nothing but the blackest art employed against me can have done it ) , I was once as dear to him as my own soul could wish .
This lock of hair , which now he can so readily give up , was begged of me with the most earnest supplication .
Had you seen his look , his manner , had you heard his voice at that moment !
Have you forgot the last evening of our being together at Barton ?
The morning that we parted too !
When he told me that it might be many weeks before we met again -- his distress -- can I ever forget his distress ? ''
For a moment or two she could say no more ; but when this emotion had passed away , she added , in a firmer tone , '' Elinor , I have been cruelly used ; but not by Willoughby . ''
`` Dearest Marianne , who but himself ?
By whom can he have been instigated ? ''
`` By all the world , rather than by his own heart .
I could rather believe every creature of my acquaintance leagued together to ruin me in his opinion , than believe his nature capable of such cruelty .
This woman of whom he writes -- whoever she be -- or any one , in short , but your own dear self , mama , and Edward , may have been so barbarous to bely me .
Beyond you three , is there a creature in the world whom I would not rather suspect of evil than Willoughby , whose heart I know so well ? ''
Elinor would not contend , and only replied , '' Whoever may have been so detestably your enemy , let them be cheated of their malignant triumph , my dear sister , by seeing how nobly the consciousness of your own innocence and good intentions supports your spirits .
It is a reasonable and laudable pride which resists such malevolence . ''
`` No , no , '' cried Marianne , `` misery such as mine has no pride .
I care not who knows that I am wretched .
The triumph of seeing me so may be open to all the world .
Elinor , Elinor , they who suffer little may be proud and independent as they like -- may resist insult , or return mortification -- but I can not .
I must feel -- I must be wretched -- and they are welcome to enjoy the consciousness of it that can . ''
`` But for my mother 's sake and mine -- '' '' I would do more than for my own .
But to appear happy when I am so miserable -- Oh !
who can require it ? ''
Again they were both silent .
Elinor was employed in walking thoughtfully from the fire to the window , from the window to the fire , without knowing that she received warmth from one , or discerning objects through the other ; and Marianne , seated at the foot of the bed , with her head leaning against one of its posts , again took up Willoughby 's letter , and , after shuddering over every sentence , exclaimed -- '' It is too much !
Oh , Willoughby , Willoughby , could this be yours !
Cruel , cruel -- nothing can acquit you .
Elinor , nothing can .
Whatever he might have heard against me -- ought he not to have suspended his belief ?
ought he not to have told me of it , to have given me the power of clearing myself ?
'The lock of hair , ( repeating it from the letter , ) which you so obligingly bestowed on me ' -- That is unpardonable .
Willoughby , where was your heart when you wrote those words ?
Oh , barbarously insolent ! -- Elinor , can he be justified ? ''
`` No , Marianne , in no possible way . ''
`` And yet this woman -- who knows what her art may have been ? -- how long it may have been premeditated , and how deeply contrived by her ! -- Who is she ? -- Who can she be ? -- Whom did I ever hear him talk of as young and attractive among his female acquaintance ? -- Oh !
no one , no one -- he talked to me only of myself . ''
Another pause ensued ; Marianne was greatly agitated , and it ended thus .
`` Elinor , I must go home .
I must go and comfort mama .
Can not we be gone to-morrow ? ''
`` To-morrow , Marianne ! ''
`` Yes , why should I stay here ?
I came only for Willoughby 's sake -- and now who cares for me ?
Who regards me ? ''
`` It would be impossible to go to-morrow .
We owe Mrs .
Jennings much more than civility ; and civility of the commonest kind must prevent such a hasty removal as that . ''
`` Well then , another day or two , perhaps ; but I can not stay here long , I can not stay to endure the questions and remarks of all these people .
The Middletons and Palmers -- how am I to bear their pity ?
The pity of such a woman as Lady Middleton !
Oh , what would HE say to that ! ''
Elinor advised her to lie down again , and for a moment she did so ; but no attitude could give her ease ; and in restless pain of mind and body she moved from one posture to another , till growing more and more hysterical , her sister could with difficulty keep her on the bed at all , and for some time was fearful of being constrained to call for assistance .
Some lavender drops , however , which she was at length persuaded to take , were of use ; and from that time till Mrs .
Jennings returned , she continued on the bed quiet and motionless .
CHAPTER 30 Mrs .
Jennings came immediately to their room on her return , and without waiting to have her request of admittance answered , opened the door and walked in with a look of real concern .
`` How do you do my dear ? ''
-- said she in a voice of great compassion to Marianne , who turned away her face without attempting to answer .
`` How is she , Miss Dashwood ? -- Poor thing !
she looks very bad. -- No wonder .
Ay , it is but too true .
He is to be married very soon -- a good-for-nothing fellow !
I have no patience with him .
Mrs .
Taylor told me of it half an hour ago , and she was told it by a particular friend of Miss Grey herself , else I am sure I should not have believed it ; and I was almost ready to sink as it was .
Well , said I , all I can say is , that if this be true , he has used a young lady of my acquaintance abominably ill , and I wish with all my soul his wife may plague his heart out .
And so I shall always say , my dear , you may depend on it .
I have no notion of men 's going on in this way ; and if ever I meet him again , I will give him such a dressing as he has not had this many a day .
But there is one comfort , my dear Miss Marianne ; he is not the only young man in the world worth having ; and with your pretty face you will never want admirers .
Well , poor thing !
I won't disturb her any longer , for she had better have her cry out at once and have done with .
The Parrys and Sandersons luckily are coming tonight you know , and that will amuse her . ''
She then went away , walking on tiptoe out of the room , as if she supposed her young friend 's affliction could be increased by noise .
Marianne , to the surprise of her sister , determined on dining with them .
Elinor even advised her against it .
But `` no , she would go down ; she could bear it very well , and the bustle about her would be less . ''
Elinor , pleased to have her governed for a moment by such a motive , though believing it hardly possible that she could sit out the dinner , said no more ; and adjusting her dress for her as well as she could , while Marianne still remained on the bed , was ready to assist her into the dining room as soon as they were summoned to it .
When there , though looking most wretchedly , she ate more and was calmer than her sister had expected .
Had she tried to speak , or had she been conscious of half Mrs .
Jennings 's well-meant but ill-judged attentions to her , this calmness could not have been maintained ; but not a syllable escaped her lips ; and the abstraction of her thoughts preserved her in ignorance of every thing that was passing before her .
Elinor , who did justice to Mrs .
Jennings 's kindness , though its effusions were often distressing , and sometimes almost ridiculous , made her those acknowledgments , and returned her those civilities , which her sister could not make or return for herself .
Their good friend saw that Marianne was unhappy , and felt that every thing was due to her which might make her at all less so .
She treated her therefore , with all the indulgent fondness of a parent towards a favourite child on the last day of its holidays .
Marianne was to have the best place by the fire , was to be tempted to eat by every delicacy in the house , and to be amused by the relation of all the news of the day .
Had not Elinor , in the sad countenance of her sister , seen a check to all mirth , she could have been entertained by Mrs .
Jennings 's endeavours to cure a disappointment in love , by a variety of sweetmeats and olives , and a good fire .
As soon , however , as the consciousness of all this was forced by continual repetition on Marianne , she could stay no longer .
With a hasty exclamation of Misery , and a sign to her sister not to follow her , she directly got up and hurried out of the room .
`` Poor soul ! ''
cried Mrs .
Jennings , as soon as she was gone , '' how it grieves me to see her !
And I declare if she is not gone away without finishing her wine !
And the dried cherries too !
Lord !
nothing seems to do her any good .
I am sure if I knew of any thing she would like , I would send all over the town for it .
Well , it is the oddest thing to me , that a man should use such a pretty girl so ill !
But when there is plenty of money on one side , and next to none on the other , Lord bless you !
they care no more about such things ! -- '' '' The lady then -- Miss Grey I think you called her -- is very rich ? ''
`` Fifty thousand pounds , my dear .
Did you ever see her ?
a smart , stylish girl they say , but not handsome .
I remember her aunt very well , Biddy Henshawe ; she married a very wealthy man .
But the family are all rich together .
Fifty thousand pounds !
and by all accounts , it wo n't come before it 's wanted ; for they say he is all to pieces .
No wonder !
dashing about with his curricle and hunters !
Well , it do n't signify talking ; but when a young man , be who he will , comes and makes love to a pretty girl , and promises marriage , he has no business to fly off from his word only because he grows poor , and a richer girl is ready to have him .
Why do n't he , in such a case , sell his horses , let his house , turn off his servants , and make a thorough reform at once ?
I warrant you , Miss Marianne would have been ready to wait till matters came round .
But that wo n't do now-a-days ; nothing in the way of pleasure can ever be given up by the young men of this age . ''
`` Do you know what kind of a girl Miss Grey is ?
Is she said to be amiable ? ''
`` I never heard any harm of her ; indeed I hardly ever heard her mentioned ; except that Mrs .
Taylor did say this morning , that one day Miss Walker hinted to her , that she believed Mr .
and Mrs .
Ellison would not be sorry to have Miss Grey married , for she and Mrs .
Ellison could never agree . ''
-- '' And who are the Ellisons ? ''
`` Her guardians , my dear .
But now she is of age and may choose for herself ; and a pretty choice she has made ! -- What now , '' after pausing a moment -- '' your poor sister is gone to her own room , I suppose , to moan by herself .
Is there nothing one can get to comfort her ?
Poor dear , it seems quite cruel to let her be alone .
Well , by-and-by we shall have a few friends , and that will amuse her a little .
What shall we play at ?
She hates whist I know ; but is there no round game she cares for ? ''
`` Dear ma'am , this kindness is quite unnecessary .
Marianne , I dare say , will not leave her room again this evening .
I shall persuade her if I can to go early to bed , for I am sure she wants rest . ''
`` Aye , I believe that will be best for her .
Let her name her own supper , and go to bed .
Lord !
no wonder she has been looking so bad and so cast down this last week or two , for this matter I suppose has been hanging over her head as long as that .
And so the letter that came today finished it !
Poor soul !
I am sure if I had had a notion of it , I would not have joked her about it for all my money .
But then you know , how should I guess such a thing ?
I made sure of its being nothing but a common love letter , and you know young people like to be laughed at about them .
Lord !
how concerned Sir John and my daughters will be when they hear it !
If I had my senses about me I might have called in Conduit Street in my way home , and told them of it .
But I shall see them tomorrow . ''
`` It would be unnecessary I am sure , for you to caution Mrs .
Palmer and Sir John against ever naming Mr .
Willoughby , or making the slightest allusion to what has passed , before my sister .
Their own good-nature must point out to them the real cruelty of appearing to know any thing about it when she is present ; and the less that may ever be said to myself on the subject , the more my feelings will be spared , as you my dear madam will easily believe . ''
`` Oh !
Lord !
yes , that I do indeed .
It must be terrible for you to hear it talked of ; and as for your sister , I am sure I would not mention a word about it to her for the world .
You saw I did not all dinner time .
No more would Sir John , nor my daughters , for they are all very thoughtful and considerate ; especially if I give them a hint , as I certainly will .
For my part , I think the less that is said about such things , the better , the sooner 't is blown over and forgot .
And what does talking ever do you know ? ''
`` In this affair it can only do harm ; more so perhaps than in many cases of a similar kind , for it has been attended by circumstances which , for the sake of every one concerned in it , make it unfit to become the public conversation .
I must do THIS justice to Mr .
Willoughby -- he has broken no positive engagement with my sister . ''
`` Law , my dear !
Do n't pretend to defend him .
No positive engagement indeed !
after taking her all over Allenham House , and fixing on the very rooms they were to live in hereafter ! ''
Elinor , for her sister 's sake , could not press the subject farther , and she hoped it was not required of her for Willoughby 's ; since , though Marianne might lose much , he could gain very little by the enforcement of the real truth .
After a short silence on both sides , Mrs .
Jennings , with all her natural hilarity , burst forth again .
`` Well , my dear , 't is a true saying about an ill-wind , for it will be all the better for Colonel Brandon .
He will have her at last ; aye , that he will .
Mind me , now , if they a n't married by Mid-summer .
Lord !
how he'll chuckle over this news !
I hope he will come tonight .
It will be all to one a better match for your sister .
Two thousand a year without debt or drawback -- except the little love-child , indeed ; aye , I had forgot her ; but she may be 'prenticed out at a small cost , and then what does it signify ?
Delaford is a nice place , I can tell you ; exactly what I call a nice old fashioned place , full of comforts and conveniences ; quite shut in with great garden walls that are covered with the best fruit-trees in the country ; and such a mulberry tree in one corner !
Lord !
how Charlotte and I did stuff the only time we were there !
Then , there is a dove-cote , some delightful stew-ponds , and a very pretty canal ; and every thing , in short , that one could wish for ; and , moreover , it is close to the church , and only a quarter of a mile from the turnpike-road , so 't is never dull , for if you only go and sit up in an old yew arbour behind the house , you may see all the carriages that pass along .
Oh !
't is a nice place !
A butcher hard by in the village , and the parsonage-house within a stone 's throw .
To my fancy , a thousand times prettier than Barton Park , where they are forced to send three miles for their meat , and have not a neighbour nearer than your mother .
Well , I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon as I can .
One shoulder of mutton , you know , drives another down .
If we CAN but put Willoughby out of her head ! ''
`` Ay , if we can do THAT , Ma'am , '' said Elinor , '' we shall do very well with or without Colonel Brandon . ''
And then rising , she went away to join Marianne , whom she found , as she expected , in her own room , leaning , in silent misery , over the small remains of a fire , which , till Elinor 's entrance , had been her only light .
`` You had better leave me , '' was all the notice that her sister received from her .
`` I will leave you , '' said Elinor , `` if you will go to bed . ''
But this , from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering , she at first refused to do .
Her sister 's earnest , though gentle persuasion , however , soon softened her to compliance , and Elinor saw her lay her aching head on the pillow , and as she hoped , in a way to get some quiet rest before she left her .
In the drawing-room , whither she then repaired , she was soon joined by Mrs .
Jennings , with a wine-glass , full of something , in her hand .
`` My dear , '' said she , entering , `` I have just recollected that I have some of the finest old Constantia wine in the house that ever was tasted , so I have brought a glass of it for your sister .
My poor husband !
how fond he was of it !
Whenever he had a touch of his old colicky gout , he said it did him more good than any thing else in the world .
Do take it to your sister . ''
`` Dear Ma'am , '' replied Elinor , smiling at the difference of the complaints for which it was recommended , `` how good you are !
But I have just left Marianne in bed , and , I hope , almost asleep ; and as I think nothing will be of so much service to her as rest , if you will give me leave , I will drink the wine myself . ''
Mrs .
Jennings , though regretting that she had not been five minutes earlier , was satisfied with the compromise ; and Elinor , as she swallowed the chief of it , reflected , that though its effects on a colicky gout were , at present , of little importance to her , its healing powers , on a disappointed heart might be as reasonably tried on herself as on her sister .
Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at tea , and by his manner of looking round the room for Marianne , Elinor immediately fancied that he neither expected nor wished to see her there , and , in short , that he was already aware of what occasioned her absence .
Mrs .
Jennings was not struck by the same thought ; for soon after his entrance , she walked across the room to the tea-table where Elinor presided , and whispered -- '' The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see .
He knows nothing of it ; do tell him , my dear . ''
He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to her 's , and , with a look which perfectly assured her of his good information , inquired after her sister .
`` Marianne is not well , '' said she .
`` She has been indisposed all day , and we have persuaded her to go to bed . ''
`` Perhaps , then , '' he hesitatingly replied , `` what I heard this morning may be -- there may be more truth in it than I could believe possible at first . ''
`` What did you hear ? ''
`` That a gentleman , whom I had reason to think -- in short , that a man , whom I KNEW to be engaged -- but how shall I tell you ?
If you know it already , as surely you must , I may be spared . ''
`` You mean , '' answered Elinor , with forced calmness , '' Mr .
Willoughby 's marriage with Miss Grey .
Yes , we DO know it all .
This seems to have been a day of general elucidation , for this very morning first unfolded it to us .
Mr .
Willoughby is unfathomable !
Where did you hear it ? ''
`` In a stationer 's shop in Pall Mall , where I had business .
Two ladies were waiting for their carriage , and one of them was giving the other an account of the intended match , in a voice so little attempting concealment , that it was impossible for me not to hear all .
The name of Willoughby , John Willoughby , frequently repeated , first caught my attention ; and what followed was a positive assertion that every thing was now finally settled respecting his marriage with Miss Grey -- it was no longer to be a secret -- it would take place even within a few weeks , with many particulars of preparations and other matters .
One thing , especially , I remember , because it served to identify the man still more : -- as soon as the ceremony was over , they were to go to Combe Magna , his seat in Somersetshire .
My astonishment ! -- but it would be impossible to describe what I felt .
The communicative lady I learnt , on inquiry , for I stayed in the shop till they were gone , was a Mrs .
Ellison , and that , as I have been since informed , is the name of Miss Grey 's guardian . ''
`` It is .
But have you likewise heard that Miss Grey has fifty thousand pounds ?
In that , if in any thing , we may find an explanation . ''
`` It may be so ; but Willoughby is capable -- at least I think '' -- he stopped a moment ; then added in a voice which seemed to distrust itself , `` And your sister -- how did she -- '' '' Her sufferings have been very severe .
I have only to hope that they may be proportionately short .
It has been , it is a most cruel affliction .
Till yesterday , I believe , she never doubted his regard ; and even now , perhaps -- but I am almost convinced that he never was really attached to her .
He has been very deceitful !
and , in some points , there seems a hardness of heart about him . ''
`` Ah ! ''
said Colonel Brandon , `` there is , indeed !
But your sister does not -- I think you said so -- she does not consider quite as you do ? ''
`` You know her disposition , and may believe how eagerly she would still justify him if she could . ''
He made no answer ; and soon afterwards , by the removal of the tea-things , and the arrangement of the card parties , the subject was necessarily dropped .
Mrs .
Jennings , who had watched them with pleasure while they were talking , and who expected to see the effect of Miss Dashwood 's communication , in such an instantaneous gaiety on Colonel Brandon 's side , as might have become a man in the bloom of youth , of hope and happiness , saw him , with amazement , remain the whole evening more serious and thoughtful than usual .
CHAPTER 31 From a night of more sleep than she had expected , Marianne awoke the next morning to the same consciousness of misery in which she had closed her eyes .
Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk of what she felt ; and before breakfast was ready , they had gone through the subject again and again ; and with the same steady conviction and affectionate counsel on Elinor 's side , the same impetuous feelings and varying opinions on Marianne 's , as before .
Sometimes she could believe Willoughby to be as unfortunate and as innocent as herself , and at others , lost every consolation in the impossibility of acquitting him .
At one moment she was absolutely indifferent to the observation of all the world , at another she would seclude herself from it for ever , and at a third could resist it with energy .
In one thing , however , she was uniform , when it came to the point , in avoiding , where it was possible , the presence of Mrs .
Jennings , and in a determined silence when obliged to endure it .
Her heart was hardened against the belief of Mrs .
Jennings's entering into her sorrows with any compassion .
`` No , no , no , it can not be , '' she cried ; '' she can not feel .
Her kindness is not sympathy ; her good-nature is not tenderness .
All that she wants is gossip , and she only likes me now because I supply it . ''
Elinor had not needed this to be assured of the injustice to which her sister was often led in her opinion of others , by the irritable refinement of her own mind , and the too great importance placed by her on the delicacies of a strong sensibility , and the graces of a polished manner .
Like half the rest of the world , if more than half there be that are clever and good , Marianne , with excellent abilities and an excellent disposition , was neither reasonable nor candid .
She expected from other people the same opinions and feelings as her own , and she judged of their motives by the immediate effect of their actions on herself .
Thus a circumstance occurred , while the sisters were together in their own room after breakfast , which sunk the heart of Mrs .
Jennings still lower in her estimation ; because , through her own weakness , it chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to herself , though Mrs .
Jennings was governed in it by an impulse of the utmost goodwill .
With a letter in her outstretched hand , and countenance gaily smiling , from the persuasion of bringing comfort , she entered their room , saying , '' Now , my dear , I bring you something that I am sure will do you good . ''
Marianne heard enough .
In one moment her imagination placed before her a letter from Willoughby , full of tenderness and contrition , explanatory of all that had passed , satisfactory , convincing ; and instantly followed by Willoughby himself , rushing eagerly into the room to inforce , at her feet , by the eloquence of his eyes , the assurances of his letter .
The work of one moment was destroyed by the next .
The hand writing of her mother , never till then unwelcome , was before her ; and , in the acuteness of the disappointment which followed such an ecstasy of more than hope , she felt as if , till that instant , she had never suffered .
The cruelty of Mrs .
Jennings no language , within her reach in her moments of happiest eloquence , could have expressed ; and now she could reproach her only by the tears which streamed from her eyes with passionate violence -- a reproach , however , so entirely lost on its object , that after many expressions of pity , she withdrew , still referring her to the letter of comfort .
But the letter , when she was calm enough to read it , brought little comfort .
Willoughby filled every page .
Her mother , still confident of their engagement , and relying as warmly as ever on his constancy , had only been roused by Elinor 's application , to intreat from Marianne greater openness towards them both ; and this , with such tenderness towards her , such affection for Willoughby , and such a conviction of their future happiness in each other , that she wept with agony through the whole of it .
All her impatience to be at home again now returned ; her mother was dearer to her than ever ; dearer through the very excess of her mistaken confidence in Willoughby , and she was wildly urgent to be gone .
Elinor , unable herself to determine whether it were better for Marianne to be in London or at Barton , offered no counsel of her own except of patience till their mother 's wishes could be known ; and at length she obtained her sister 's consent to wait for that knowledge .
Mrs .
Jennings left them earlier than usual ; for she could not be easy till the Middletons and Palmers were able to grieve as much as herself ; and positively refusing Elinor 's offered attendance , went out alone for the rest of the morning .
Elinor , with a very heavy heart , aware of the pain she was going to communicate , and perceiving , by Marianne 's letter , how ill she had succeeded in laying any foundation for it , then sat down to write her mother an account of what had passed , and entreat her directions for the future ; while Marianne , who came into the drawing-room on Mrs .
Jennings 's going away , remained fixed at the table where Elinor wrote , watching the advancement of her pen , grieving over her for the hardship of such a task , and grieving still more fondly over its effect on her mother .
In this manner they had continued about a quarter of an hour , when Marianne , whose nerves could not then bear any sudden noise , was startled by a rap at the door .
`` Who can this be ? ''
cried Elinor .
`` So early too !
I thought we HAD been safe . ''
Marianne moved to the window -- '' It is Colonel Brandon ! ''
said she , with vexation .
`` We are never safe from HIM . ''
`` He will not come in , as Mrs .
Jennings is from home . ''
`` I will not trust to THAT , '' retreating to her own room .
`` A man who has nothing to do with his own time has no conscience in his intrusion on that of others . ''
The event proved her conjecture right , though it was founded on injustice and error ; for Colonel Brandon DID come in ; and Elinor , who was convinced that solicitude for Marianne brought him thither , and who saw THAT solicitude in his disturbed and melancholy look , and in his anxious though brief inquiry after her , could not forgive her sister for esteeming him so lightly .
`` I met Mrs .
Jennings in Bond Street , '' said he , after the first salutation , `` and she encouraged me to come on ; and I was the more easily encouraged , because I thought it probable that I might find you alone , which I was very desirous of doing .
My object -- my wish -- my sole wish in desiring it -- I hope , I believe it is -- is to be a means of giving comfort ; -- no , I must not say comfort -- not present comfort -- but conviction , lasting conviction to your sister 's mind .
My regard for her , for yourself , for your mother -- will you allow me to prove it , by relating some circumstances which nothing but a VERY sincere regard -- nothing but an earnest desire of being useful -- I think I am justified -- though where so many hours have been spent in convincing myself that I am right , is there not some reason to fear I may be wrong ? ''
He stopped .
`` I understand you , '' said Elinor .
`` You have something to tell me of Mr .
Willoughby , that will open his character farther .
Your telling it will be the greatest act of friendship that can be shewn Marianne .
MY gratitude will be insured immediately by any information tending to that end , and HERS must be gained by it in time .
Pray , pray let me hear it . ''
`` You shall ; and , to be brief , when I quitted Barton last October , -- but this will give you no idea -- I must go farther back .
You will find me a very awkward narrator , Miss Dashwood ; I hardly know where to begin .
A short account of myself , I believe , will be necessary , and it SHALL be a short one .
On such a subject , '' sighing heavily , '' can I have little temptation to be diffuse . ''
He stopt a moment for recollection , and then , with another sigh , went on .
`` You have probably entirely forgotten a conversation -- ( it is not to be supposed that it could make any impression on you ) -- a conversation between us one evening at Barton Park -- it was the evening of a dance -- in which I alluded to a lady I had once known , as resembling , in some measure , your sister Marianne . ''
`` Indeed , '' answered Elinor , `` I have NOT forgotten it . ''
He looked pleased by this remembrance , and added , '' If I am not deceived by the uncertainty , the partiality of tender recollection , there is a very strong resemblance between them , as well in mind as person .
The same warmth of heart , the same eagerness of fancy and spirits .
This lady was one of my nearest relations , an orphan from her infancy , and under the guardianship of my father .
Our ages were nearly the same , and from our earliest years we were playfellows and friends .
I can not remember the time when I did not love Eliza ; and my affection for her , as we grew up , was such , as perhaps , judging from my present forlorn and cheerless gravity , you might think me incapable of having ever felt .
Her 's , for me , was , I believe , fervent as the attachment of your sister to Mr .
Willoughby and it was , though from a different cause , no less unfortunate .
At seventeen she was lost to me for ever .
She was married -- married against her inclination to my brother .
Her fortune was large , and our family estate much encumbered .
And this , I fear , is all that can be said for the conduct of one , who was at once her uncle and guardian .
My brother did not deserve her ; he did not even love her .
I had hoped that her regard for me would support her under any difficulty , and for some time it did ; but at last the misery of her situation , for she experienced great unkindness , overcame all her resolution , and though she had promised me that nothing -- but how blindly I relate !
I have never told you how this was brought on .
We were within a few hours of eloping together for Scotland .
The treachery , or the folly , of my cousin 's maid betrayed us .
I was banished to the house of a relation far distant , and she was allowed no liberty , no society , no amusement , till my father 's point was gained .
I had depended on her fortitude too far , and the blow was a severe one -- but had her marriage been happy , so young as I then was , a few months must have reconciled me to it , or at least I should not have now to lament it .
This however was not the case .
My brother had no regard for her ; his pleasures were not what they ought to have been , and from the first he treated her unkindly .
The consequence of this , upon a mind so young , so lively , so inexperienced as Mrs .
Brandon 's , was but too natural .
She resigned herself at first to all the misery of her situation ; and happy had it been if she had not lived to overcome those regrets which the remembrance of me occasioned .
But can we wonder that , with such a husband to provoke inconstancy , and without a friend to advise or restrain her ( for my father lived only a few months after their marriage , and I was with my regiment in the East Indies ) she should fall ?
Had I remained in England , perhaps -- but I meant to promote the happiness of both by removing from her for years , and for that purpose had procured my exchange .
The shock which her marriage had given me , '' he continued , in a voice of great agitation , `` was of trifling weight -- was nothing to what I felt when I heard , about two years afterwards , of her divorce .
It was THAT which threw this gloom , -- even now the recollection of what I suffered -- '' He could say no more , and rising hastily walked for a few minutes about the room .
Elinor , affected by his relation , and still more by his distress , could not speak .
He saw her concern , and coming to her , took her hand , pressed it , and kissed it with grateful respect .
A few minutes more of silent exertion enabled him to proceed with composure .
`` It was nearly three years after this unhappy period before I returned to England .
My first care , when I DID arrive , was of course to seek for her ; but the search was as fruitless as it was melancholy .
I could not trace her beyond her first seducer , and there was every reason to fear that she had removed from him only to sink deeper in a life of sin .
Her legal allowance was not adequate to her fortune , nor sufficient for her comfortable maintenance , and I learnt from my brother that the power of receiving it had been made over some months before to another person .
He imagined , and calmly could he imagine it , that her extravagance , and consequent distress , had obliged her to dispose of it for some immediate relief .
At last , however , and after I had been six months in England , I DID find her .
Regard for a former servant of my own , who had since fallen into misfortune , carried me to visit him in a spunging-house , where he was confined for debt ; and there , the same house , under a similar confinement , was my unfortunate sister .
So altered -- so faded -- worn down by acute suffering of every kind !
hardly could I believe the melancholy and sickly figure before me , to be the remains of the lovely , blooming , healthful girl , on whom I had once doted .
What I endured in so beholding her -- but I have no right to wound your feelings by attempting to describe it -- I have pained you too much already .
That she was , to all appearance , in the last stage of a consumption , was -- yes , in such a situation it was my greatest comfort .
Life could do nothing for her , beyond giving time for a better preparation for death ; and that was given .
I saw her placed in comfortable lodgings , and under proper attendants ; I visited her every day during the rest of her short life : I was with her in her last moments . ''
Again he stopped to recover himself ; and Elinor spoke her feelings in an exclamation of tender concern , at the fate of his unfortunate friend .
`` Your sister , I hope , can not be offended , '' said he , '' by the resemblance I have fancied between her and my poor disgraced relation .
Their fates , their fortunes , can not be the same ; and had the natural sweet disposition of the one been guarded by a firmer mind , or a happier marriage , she might have been all that you will live to see the other be .
But to what does all this lead ?
I seem to have been distressing you for nothing .
Ah !
Miss Dashwood -- a subject such as this -- untouched for fourteen years -- it is dangerous to handle it at all !
I WILL be more collected -- more concise .
She left to my care her only child , a little girl , the offspring of her first guilty connection , who was then about three years old .
She loved the child , and had always kept it with her .
It was a valued , a precious trust to me ; and gladly would I have discharged it in the strictest sense , by watching over her education myself , had the nature of our situations allowed it ; but I had no family , no home ; and my little Eliza was therefore placed at school .
I saw her there whenever I could , and after the death of my brother , ( which happened about five years ago , and which left to me the possession of the family property , ) she visited me at Delaford .
I called her a distant relation ; but I am well aware that I have in general been suspected of a much nearer connection with her .
It is now three years ago ( she had just reached her fourteenth year , ) that I removed her from school , to place her under the care of a very respectable woman , residing in Dorsetshire , who had the charge of four or five other girls of about the same time of life ; and for two years I had every reason to be pleased with her situation .
But last February , almost a twelvemonth back , she suddenly disappeared .
I had allowed her , ( imprudently , as it has since turned out , ) at her earnest desire , to go to Bath with one of her young friends , who was attending her father there for his health .
I knew him to be a very good sort of man , and I thought well of his daughter -- better than she deserved , for , with a most obstinate and ill-judged secrecy , she would tell nothing , would give no clue , though she certainly knew all .
He , her father , a well-meaning , but not a quick-sighted man , could really , I believe , give no information ; for he had been generally confined to the house , while the girls were ranging over the town and making what acquaintance they chose ; and he tried to convince me , as thoroughly as he was convinced himself , of his daughter 's being entirely unconcerned in the business .
In short , I could learn nothing but that she was gone ; all the rest , for eight long months , was left to conjecture .
What I thought , what I feared , may be imagined ; and what I suffered too . ''
`` Good heavens ! ''
cried Elinor , `` could it be -- could Willoughby ! ''
-- '' The first news that reached me of her , '' he continued , '' came in a letter from herself , last October .
It was forwarded to me from Delaford , and I received it on the very morning of our intended party to Whitwell ; and this was the reason of my leaving Barton so suddenly , which I am sure must at the time have appeared strange to every body , and which I believe gave offence to some .
Little did Mr .
Willoughby imagine , I suppose , when his looks censured me for incivility in breaking up the party , that I was called away to the relief of one whom he had made poor and miserable ; but HAD he known it , what would it have availed ?
Would he have been less gay or less happy in the smiles of your sister ?
No , he had already done that , which no man who CAN feel for another would do .
He had left the girl whose youth and innocence he had seduced , in a situation of the utmost distress , with no creditable home , no help , no friends , ignorant of his address !
He had left her , promising to return ; he neither returned , nor wrote , nor relieved her . ''
`` This is beyond every thing ! ''
exclaimed Elinor .
`` His character is now before you ; expensive , dissipated , and worse than both .
Knowing all this , as I have now known it many weeks , guess what I must have felt on seeing your sister as fond of him as ever , and on being assured that she was to marry him : guess what I must have felt for all your sakes .
When I came to you last week and found you alone , I came determined to know the truth ; though irresolute what to do when it WAS known .
My behaviour must have seemed strange to you then ; but now you will comprehend it .
To suffer you all to be so deceived ; to see your sister -- but what could I do ?
I had no hope of interfering with success ; and sometimes I thought your sister 's influence might yet reclaim him .
But now , after such dishonorable usage , who can tell what were his designs on her .
Whatever they may have been , however , she may now , and hereafter doubtless WILL turn with gratitude towards her own condition , when she compares it with that of my poor Eliza , when she considers the wretched and hopeless situation of this poor girl , and pictures her to herself , with an affection for him so strong , still as strong as her own , and with a mind tormented by self-reproach , which must attend her through life .
Surely this comparison must have its use with her .
She will feel her own sufferings to be nothing .
They proceed from no misconduct , and can bring no disgrace .
On the contrary , every friend must be made still more her friend by them .
Concern for her unhappiness , and respect for her fortitude under it , must strengthen every attachment .
Use your own discretion , however , in communicating to her what I have told you .
You must know best what will be its effect ; but had I not seriously , and from my heart believed it might be of service , might lessen her regrets , I would not have suffered myself to trouble you with this account of my family afflictions , with a recital which may seem to have been intended to raise myself at the expense of others . ''
Elinor 's thanks followed this speech with grateful earnestness ; attended too with the assurance of her expecting material advantage to Marianne , from the communication of what had passed .
`` I have been more pained , '' said she , `` by her endeavors to acquit him than by all the rest ; for it irritates her mind more than the most perfect conviction of his unworthiness can do .
Now , though at first she will suffer much , I am sure she will soon become easier .
Have you , '' she continued , after a short silence , '' ever seen Mr .
Willoughby since you left him at Barton ? ''
`` Yes , '' he replied gravely , `` once I have .
One meeting was unavoidable . ''
Elinor , startled by his manner , looked at him anxiously , saying , '' What ?
have you met him to -- '' '' I could meet him no other way .
Eliza had confessed to me , though most reluctantly , the name of her lover ; and when he returned to town , which was within a fortnight after myself , we met by appointment , he to defend , I to punish his conduct .
We returned unwounded , and the meeting , therefore , never got abroad . ''
Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this ; but to a man and a soldier she presumed not to censure it .
`` Such , '' said Colonel Brandon , after a pause , '' has been the unhappy resemblance between the fate of mother and daughter !
and so imperfectly have I discharged my trust ! ''
`` Is she still in town ? ''
`` No ; as soon as she recovered from her lying-in , for I found her near her delivery , I removed her and her child into the country , and there she remains . ''
Recollecting , soon afterwards , that he was probably dividing Elinor from her sister , he put an end to his visit , receiving from her again the same grateful acknowledgments , and leaving her full of compassion and esteem for him .
CHAPTER 32 When the particulars of this conversation were repeated by Miss Dashwood to her sister , as they very soon were , the effect on her was not entirely such as the former had hoped to see .
Not that Marianne appeared to distrust the truth of any part of it , for she listened to it all with the most steady and submissive attention , made neither objection nor remark , attempted no vindication of Willoughby , and seemed to shew by her tears that she felt it to be impossible .
But though this behaviour assured Elinor that the conviction of this guilt WAS carried home to her mind , though she saw with satisfaction the effect of it , in her no longer avoiding Colonel Brandon when he called , in her speaking to him , even voluntarily speaking , with a kind of compassionate respect , and though she saw her spirits less violently irritated than before , she did not see her less wretched .
Her mind did become settled , but it was settled in a gloomy dejection .
She felt the loss of Willoughby 's character yet more heavily than she had felt the loss of his heart ; his seduction and desertion of Miss Williams , the misery of that poor girl , and the doubt of what his designs might ONCE have been on herself , preyed altogether so much on her spirits , that she could not bring herself to speak of what she felt even to Elinor ; and , brooding over her sorrows in silence , gave more pain to her sister than could have been communicated by the most open and most frequent confession of them .
To give the feelings or the language of Mrs .
Dashwood on receiving and answering Elinor 's letter would be only to give a repetition of what her daughters had already felt and said ; of a disappointment hardly less painful than Marianne 's , and an indignation even greater than Elinor 's .
Long letters from her , quickly succeeding each other , arrived to tell all that she suffered and thought ; to express her anxious solicitude for Marianne , and entreat she would bear up with fortitude under this misfortune .
Bad indeed must the nature of Marianne 's affliction be , when her mother could talk of fortitude !
mortifying and humiliating must be the origin of those regrets , which SHE could wish her not to indulge !
Against the interest of her own individual comfort , Mrs .
Dashwood had determined that it would be better for Marianne to be any where , at that time , than at Barton , where every thing within her view would be bringing back the past in the strongest and most afflicting manner , by constantly placing Willoughby before her , such as she had always seen him there .
She recommended it to her daughters , therefore , by all means not to shorten their visit to Mrs .
Jennings ; the length of which , though never exactly fixed , had been expected by all to comprise at least five or six weeks .
A variety of occupations , of objects , and of company , which could not be procured at Barton , would be inevitable there , and might yet , she hoped , cheat Marianne , at times , into some interest beyond herself , and even into some amusement , much as the ideas of both might now be spurned by her .
From all danger of seeing Willoughby again , her mother considered her to be at least equally safe in town as in the country , since his acquaintance must now be dropped by all who called themselves her friends .
Design could never bring them in each other 's way : negligence could never leave them exposed to a surprise ; and chance had less in its favour in the crowd of London than even in the retirement of Barton , where it might force him before her while paying that visit at Allenham on his marriage , which Mrs .
Dashwood , from foreseeing at first as a probable event , had brought herself to expect as a certain one .
She had yet another reason for wishing her children to remain where they were ; a letter from her son-in-law had told her that he and his wife were to be in town before the middle of February , and she judged it right that they should sometimes see their brother .
Marianne had promised to be guided by her mother 's opinion , and she submitted to it therefore without opposition , though it proved perfectly different from what she wished and expected , though she felt it to be entirely wrong , formed on mistaken grounds , and that by requiring her longer continuance in London it deprived her of the only possible alleviation of her wretchedness , the personal sympathy of her mother , and doomed her to such society and such scenes as must prevent her ever knowing a moment 's rest .
But it was a matter of great consolation to her , that what brought evil to herself would bring good to her sister ; and Elinor , on the other hand , suspecting that it would not be in her power to avoid Edward entirely , comforted herself by thinking , that though their longer stay would therefore militate against her own happiness , it would be better for Marianne than an immediate return into Devonshire .
Her carefulness in guarding her sister from ever hearing Willoughby 's name mentioned , was not thrown away .
Marianne , though without knowing it herself , reaped all its advantage ; for neither Mrs .
Jennings , nor Sir John , nor even Mrs .
Palmer herself , ever spoke of him before her .
Elinor wished that the same forbearance could have extended towards herself , but that was impossible , and she was obliged to listen day after day to the indignation of them all .
Sir John , could not have thought it possible .
`` A man of whom he had always had such reason to think well !
Such a good-natured fellow !
He did not believe there was a bolder rider in England !
It was an unaccountable business .
He wished him at the devil with all his heart .
He would not speak another word to him , meet him where he might , for all the world !
No , not if it were to be by the side of Barton covert , and they were kept watching for two hours together .
Such a scoundrel of a fellow !
such a deceitful dog !
It was only the last time they met that he had offered him one of Folly 's puppies !
and this was the end of it ! ''
Mrs .
Palmer , in her way , was equally angry .
`` She was determined to drop his acquaintance immediately , and she was very thankful that she had never been acquainted with him at all .
She wished with all her heart Combe Magna was not so near Cleveland ; but it did not signify , for it was a great deal too far off to visit ; she hated him so much that she was resolved never to mention his name again , and she should tell everybody she saw , how good-for-nothing he was . ''
The rest of Mrs .
Palmer 's sympathy was shewn in procuring all the particulars in her power of the approaching marriage , and communicating them to Elinor .
She could soon tell at what coachmaker 's the new carriage was building , by what painter Mr .
Willoughby 's portrait was drawn , and at what warehouse Miss Grey 's clothes might be seen .
The calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton on the occasion was a happy relief to Elinor 's spirits , oppressed as they often were by the clamorous kindness of the others .
It was a great comfort to her to be sure of exciting no interest in ONE person at least among their circle of friends : a great comfort to know that there was ONE who would meet her without feeling any curiosity after particulars , or any anxiety for her sister 's health .
Every qualification is raised at times , by the circumstances of the moment , to more than its real value ; and she was sometimes worried down by officious condolence to rate good-breeding as more indispensable to comfort than good-nature .
Lady Middleton expressed her sense of the affair about once every day , or twice , if the subject occurred very often , by saying , `` It is very shocking , indeed ! ''
and by the means of this continual though gentle vent , was able not only to see the Miss Dashwoods from the first without the smallest emotion , but very soon to see them without recollecting a word of the matter ; and having thus supported the dignity of her own sex , and spoken her decided censure of what was wrong in the other , she thought herself at liberty to attend to the interest of her own assemblies , and therefore determined ( though rather against the opinion of Sir John ) that as Mrs .
Willoughby would at once be a woman of elegance and fortune , to leave her card with her as soon as she married .
Colonel Brandon 's delicate , unobtrusive enquiries were never unwelcome to Miss Dashwood .
He had abundantly earned the privilege of intimate discussion of her sister 's disappointment , by the friendly zeal with which he had endeavoured to soften it , and they always conversed with confidence .
His chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosing past sorrows and present humiliations , was given in the pitying eye with which Marianne sometimes observed him , and the gentleness of her voice whenever ( though it did not often happen ) she was obliged , or could oblige herself to speak to him .
THESE assured him that his exertion had produced an increase of good-will towards himself , and THESE gave Elinor hopes of its being farther augmented hereafter ; but Mrs .
Jennings , who knew nothing of all this , who knew only that the Colonel continued as grave as ever , and that she could neither prevail on him to make the offer himself , nor commission her to make it for him , began , at the end of two days , to think that , instead of Midsummer , they would not be married till Michaelmas , and by the end of a week that it would not be a match at all .
The good understanding between the Colonel and Miss Dashwood seemed rather to declare that the honours of the mulberry-tree , the canal , and the yew arbour , would all be made over to HER ; and Mrs .
Jennings had , for some time ceased to think at all of Mrs .
Ferrars .
Early in February , within a fortnight from the receipt of Willoughby 's letter , Elinor had the painful office of informing her sister that he was married .
She had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed to herself , as soon as it was known that the ceremony was over , as she was desirous that Marianne should not receive the first notice of it from the public papers , which she saw her eagerly examining every morning .
She received the news with resolute composure ; made no observation on it , and at first shed no tears ; but after a short time they would burst out , and for the rest of the day , she was in a state hardly less pitiable than when she first learnt to expect the event .
The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were married ; and Elinor now hoped , as there could be no danger of her seeing either of them , to prevail on her sister , who had never yet left the house since the blow first fell , to go out again by degrees as she had done before .
About this time the two Miss Steeles , lately arrived at their cousin 's house in Bartlett 's Buildings , Holburn , presented themselves again before their more grand relations in Conduit and Berkeley Streets ; and were welcomed by them all with great cordiality .
Elinor only was sorry to see them .
Their presence always gave her pain , and she hardly knew how to make a very gracious return to the overpowering delight of Lucy in finding her STILL in town .
`` I should have been quite disappointed if I had not found you here STILL , '' said she repeatedly , with a strong emphasis on the word .
`` But I always thought I SHOULD .
I was almost sure you would not leave London yet awhile ; though you TOLD me , you know , at Barton , that you should not stay above a MONTH .
But I thought , at the time , that you would most likely change your mind when it came to the point .
It would have been such a great pity to have went away before your brother and sister came .
And now to be sure you will be in no hurry to be gone .
I am amazingly glad you did not keep to YOUR WORD . ''
Elinor perfectly understood her , and was forced to use all her self-command to make it appear that she did NOT .
`` Well , my dear , '' said Mrs .
Jennings , `` and how did you travel ? ''
`` Not in the stage , I assure you , '' replied Miss Steele , with quick exultation ; `` we came post all the way , and had a very smart beau to attend us .
Dr .
Davies was coming to town , and so we thought we 'd join him in a post-chaise ; and he behaved very genteelly , and paid ten or twelve shillings more than we did . ''
`` Oh , oh ! ''
cried Mrs .
Jennings ; `` very pretty , indeed !
and the Doctor is a single man , I warrant you . ''
`` There now , '' said Miss Steele , affectedly simpering , '' everybody laughs at me so about the Doctor , and I can not think why .
My cousins say they are sure I have made a conquest ; but for my part I declare I never think about him from one hour 's end to another .
'Lord !
here comes your beau , Nancy , ' my cousin said t'other day , when she saw him crossing the street to the house .
My beau , indeed !
said I -- I can not think who you mean .
The Doctor is no beau of mine . ''
`` Aye , aye , that is very pretty talking -- but it wo n't do -- the Doctor is the man , I see . ''
`` No , indeed ! ''
replied her cousin , with affected earnestness , '' and I beg you will contradict it , if you ever hear it talked of . ''
Mrs .
Jennings directly gave her the gratifying assurance that she certainly would NOT , and Miss Steele was made completely happy .
`` I suppose you will go and stay with your brother and sister , Miss Dashwood , when they come to town , '' said Lucy , returning , after a cessation of hostile hints , to the charge .
`` No , I do not think we shall . ''
`` Oh , yes , I dare say you will . ''
Elinor would not humour her by farther opposition .
`` What a charming thing it is that Mrs .
Dashwood can spare you both for so long a time together ! ''
`` Long a time , indeed ! ''
interposed Mrs .
Jennings .
`` Why , their visit is but just begun ! ''
Lucy was silenced .
`` I am sorry we can not see your sister , Miss Dashwood , '' said Miss Steele .
`` I am sorry she is not well -- '' for Marianne had left the room on their arrival .
`` You are very good .
My sister will be equally sorry to miss the pleasure of seeing you ; but she has been very much plagued lately with nervous head-aches , which make her unfit for company or conversation . ''
`` Oh , dear , that is a great pity !
but such old friends as Lucy and me ! -- I think she might see US ; and I am sure we would not speak a word . ''
Elinor , with great civility , declined the proposal .
Her sister was perhaps laid down upon the bed , or in her dressing gown , and therefore not able to come to them .
`` Oh , if that 's all , '' cried Miss Steele , `` we can just as well go and see HER . ''
Elinor began to find this impertinence too much for her temper ; but she was saved the trouble of checking it , by Lucy 's sharp reprimand , which now , as on many occasions , though it did not give much sweetness to the manners of one sister , was of advantage in governing those of the other .
CHAPTER 33 After some opposition , Marianne yielded to her sister 's entreaties , and consented to go out with her and Mrs .
Jennings one morning for half an hour .
She expressly conditioned , however , for paying no visits , and would do no more than accompany them to Gray 's in Sackville Street , where Elinor was carrying on a negotiation for the exchange of a few old-fashioned jewels of her mother .
When they stopped at the door , Mrs .
Jennings recollected that there was a lady at the other end of the street on whom she ought to call ; and as she had no business at Gray 's , it was resolved , that while her young friends transacted their 's , she should pay her visit and return for them .
On ascending the stairs , the Miss Dashwoods found so many people before them in the room , that there was not a person at liberty to tend to their orders ; and they were obliged to wait .
All that could be done was , to sit down at that end of the counter which seemed to promise the quickest succession ; one gentleman only was standing there , and it is probable that Elinor was not without hope of exciting his politeness to a quicker despatch .
But the correctness of his eye , and the delicacy of his taste , proved to be beyond his politeness .
He was giving orders for a toothpick-case for himself , and till its size , shape , and ornaments were determined , all of which , after examining and debating for a quarter of an hour over every toothpick-case in the shop , were finally arranged by his own inventive fancy , he had no leisure to bestow any other attention on the two ladies , than what was comprised in three or four very broad stares ; a kind of notice which served to imprint on Elinor the remembrance of a person and face , of strong , natural , sterling insignificance , though adorned in the first style of fashion .
Marianne was spared from the troublesome feelings of contempt and resentment , on this impertinent examination of their features , and on the puppyism of his manner in deciding on all the different horrors of the different toothpick-cases presented to his inspection , by remaining unconscious of it all ; for she was as well able to collect her thoughts within herself , and be as ignorant of what was passing around her , in Mr .
Gray 's shop , as in her own bedroom .
At last the affair was decided .
The ivory , the gold , and the pearls , all received their appointment , and the gentleman having named the last day on which his existence could be continued without the possession of the toothpick-case , drew on his gloves with leisurely care , and bestowing another glance on the Miss Dashwoods , but such a one as seemed rather to demand than express admiration , walked off with a happy air of real conceit and affected indifference .
Elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward , was on the point of concluding it , when another gentleman presented himself at her side .
She turned her eyes towards his face , and found him with some surprise to be her brother .
Their affection and pleasure in meeting was just enough to make a very creditable appearance in Mr .
Gray 's shop .
John Dashwood was really far from being sorry to see his sisters again ; it rather gave them satisfaction ; and his inquiries after their mother were respectful and attentive .
Elinor found that he and Fanny had been in town two days .
`` I wished very much to call upon you yesterday , '' said he , `` but it was impossible , for we were obliged to take Harry to see the wild beasts at Exeter Exchange ; and we spent the rest of the day with Mrs .
Ferrars .
Harry was vastly pleased .
THIS morning I had fully intended to call on you , if I could possibly find a spare half hour , but one has always so much to do on first coming to town .
I am come here to bespeak Fanny a seal .
But tomorrow I think I shall certainly be able to call in Berkeley Street , and be introduced to your friend Mrs .
Jennings .
I understand she is a woman of very good fortune .
And the Middletons too , you must introduce me to THEM .
As my mother-in-law 's relations , I shall be happy to show them every respect .
They are excellent neighbours to you in the country , I understand . ''
`` Excellent indeed .
Their attention to our comfort , their friendliness in every particular , is more than I can express . ''
`` I am extremely glad to hear it , upon my word ; extremely glad indeed .
But so it ought to be ; they are people of large fortune , they are related to you , and every civility and accommodation that can serve to make your situation pleasant might be reasonably expected .
And so you are most comfortably settled in your little cottage and want for nothing !
Edward brought us a most charming account of the place : the most complete thing of its kind , he said , that ever was , and you all seemed to enjoy it beyond any thing .
It was a great satisfaction to us to hear it , I assure you . ''
Elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brother ; and was not sorry to be spared the necessity of answering him , by the arrival of Mrs .
Jennings 's servant , who came to tell her that his mistress waited for them at the door .
Mr .
Dashwood attended them down stairs , was introduced to Mrs .
Jennings at the door of her carriage , and repeating his hope of being able to call on them the next day , took leave .
His visit was duly paid .
He came with a pretence at an apology from their sister-in-law , for not coming too ; '' but she was so much engaged with her mother , that really she had no leisure for going any where . ''
Mrs .
Jennings , however , assured him directly , that she should not stand upon ceremony , for they were all cousins , or something like it , and she should certainly wait on Mrs .
John Dashwood very soon , and bring her sisters to see her .
His manners to THEM , though calm , were perfectly kind ; to Mrs .
Jennings , most attentively civil ; and on Colonel Brandon 's coming in soon after himself , he eyed him with a curiosity which seemed to say , that he only wanted to know him to be rich , to be equally civil to HIM .
After staying with them half an hour , he asked Elinor to walk with him to Conduit Street , and introduce him to Sir John and Lady Middleton .
The weather was remarkably fine , and she readily consented .
As soon as they were out of the house , his enquiries began .
`` Who is Colonel Brandon ?
Is he a man of fortune ? ''
`` Yes ; he has very good property in Dorsetshire . ''
`` I am glad of it .
He seems a most gentlemanlike man ; and I think , Elinor , I may congratulate you on the prospect of a very respectable establishment in life . ''
`` Me , brother !
what do you mean ? ''
`` He likes you .
I observed him narrowly , and am convinced of it .
What is the amount of his fortune ? ''
`` I believe about two thousand a year . ''
`` Two thousand a-year ; '' and then working himself up to a pitch of enthusiastic generosity , he added , '' Elinor , I wish with all my heart it were TWICE as much , for your sake . ''
`` Indeed I believe you , '' replied Elinor ; `` but I am very sure that Colonel Brandon has not the smallest wish of marrying ME . ''
`` You are mistaken , Elinor ; you are very much mistaken .
A very little trouble on your side secures him .
Perhaps just at present he may be undecided ; the smallness of your fortune may make him hang back ; his friends may all advise him against it .
But some of those little attentions and encouragements which ladies can so easily give will fix him , in spite of himself .
And there can be no reason why you should not try for him .
It is not to be supposed that any prior attachment on your side -- in short , you know as to an attachment of that kind , it is quite out of the question , the objections are insurmountable -- you have too much sense not to see all that .
Colonel Brandon must be the man ; and no civility shall be wanting on my part to make him pleased with you and your family .
It is a match that must give universal satisfaction .
In short , it is a kind of thing that '' -- lowering his voice to an important whisper -- '' will be exceedingly welcome to ALL PARTIES . ''
Recollecting himself , however , he added , '' That is , I mean to say -- your friends are all truly anxious to see you well settled ; Fanny particularly , for she has your interest very much at heart , I assure you .
And her mother too , Mrs .
Ferrars , a very good-natured woman , I am sure it would give her great pleasure ; she said as much the other day . ''
Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer .
`` It would be something remarkable , now , '' he continued , '' something droll , if Fanny should have a brother and I a sister settling at the same time .
And yet it is not very unlikely . ''
`` Is Mr .
Edward Ferrars , '' said Elinor , with resolution , '' going to be married ? ''
`` It is not actually settled , but there is such a thing in agitation .
He has a most excellent mother .
Mrs .
Ferrars , with the utmost liberality , will come forward , and settle on him a thousand a year , if the match takes place .
The lady is the Hon .
Miss Morton , only daughter of the late Lord Morton , with thirty thousand pounds .
A very desirable connection on both sides , and I have not a doubt of its taking place in time .
A thousand a-year is a great deal for a mother to give away , to make over for ever ; but Mrs .
Ferrars has a noble spirit .
To give you another instance of her liberality : -- The other day , as soon as we came to town , aware that money could not be very plenty with us just now , she put bank-notes into Fanny 's hands to the amount of two hundred pounds .
And extremely acceptable it is , for we must live at a great expense while we are here . ''
He paused for her assent and compassion ; and she forced herself to say , '' Your expenses both in town and country must certainly be considerable ; but your income is a large one . ''
`` Not so large , I dare say , as many people suppose .
I do not mean to complain , however ; it is undoubtedly a comfortable one , and I hope will in time be better .
The enclosure of Norland Common , now carrying on , is a most serious drain .
And then I have made a little purchase within this half year ; East Kingham Farm , you must remember the place , where old Gibson used to live .
The land was so very desirable for me in every respect , so immediately adjoining my own property , that I felt it my duty to buy it .
I could not have answered it to my conscience to let it fall into any other hands .
A man must pay for his convenience ; and it HAS cost me a vast deal of money . ''
`` More than you think it really and intrinsically worth . ''
`` Why , I hope not that .
I might have sold it again , the next day , for more than I gave : but , with regard to the purchase-money , I might have been very unfortunate indeed ; for the stocks were at that time so low , that if I had not happened to have the necessary sum in my banker 's hands , I must have sold out to very great loss . ''
Elinor could only smile .
`` Other great and inevitable expenses too we have had on first coming to Norland .
Our respected father , as you well know , bequeathed all the Stanhill effects that remained at Norland ( and very valuable they were ) to your mother .
Far be it from me to repine at his doing so ; he had an undoubted right to dispose of his own property as he chose , but , in consequence of it , we have been obliged to make large purchases of linen , china , & c. to supply the place of what was taken away .
You may guess , after all these expenses , how very far we must be from being rich , and how acceptable Mrs .
Ferrars's kindness is . ''
`` Certainly , '' said Elinor ; `` and assisted by her liberality , I hope you may yet live to be in easy circumstances . ''
`` Another year or two may do much towards it , '' he gravely replied ; `` but however there is still a great deal to be done .
There is not a stone laid of Fanny's green-house , and nothing but the plan of the flower-garden marked out . ''
`` Where is the green-house to be ? ''
`` Upon the knoll behind the house .
The old walnut trees are all come down to make room for it .
It will be a very fine object from many parts of the park , and the flower-garden will slope down just before it , and be exceedingly pretty .
We have cleared away all the old thorns that grew in patches over the brow . ''
Elinor kept her concern and her censure to herself ; and was very thankful that Marianne was not present , to share the provocation .
Having now said enough to make his poverty clear , and to do away the necessity of buying a pair of ear-rings for each of his sisters , in his next visit at Gray's his thoughts took a cheerfuller turn , and he began to congratulate Elinor on having such a friend as Mrs .
Jennings .
`` She seems a most valuable woman indeed -- Her house , her style of living , all bespeak an exceeding good income ; and it is an acquaintance that has not only been of great use to you hitherto , but in the end may prove materially advantageous. -- Her inviting you to town is certainly a vast thing in your favour ; and indeed , it speaks altogether so great a regard for you , that in all probability when she dies you will not be forgotten. -- She must have a great deal to leave . ''
`` Nothing at all , I should rather suppose ; for she has only her jointure , which will descend to her children . ''
`` But it is not to be imagined that she lives up to her income .
Few people of common prudence will do THAT ; and whatever she saves , she will be able to dispose of . ''
`` And do you not think it more likely that she should leave it to her daughters , than to us ? ''
`` Her daughters are both exceedingly well married , and therefore I can not perceive the necessity of her remembering them farther .
Whereas , in my opinion , by her taking so much notice of you , and treating you in this kind of way , she has given you a sort of claim on her future consideration , which a conscientious woman would not disregard .
Nothing can be kinder than her behaviour ; and she can hardly do all this , without being aware of the expectation it raises . ''
`` But she raises none in those most concerned .
Indeed , brother , your anxiety for our welfare and prosperity carries you too far . ''
`` Why , to be sure , '' said he , seeming to recollect himself , '' people have little , have very little in their power .
But , my dear Elinor , what is the matter with Marianne ? -- she looks very unwell , has lost her colour , and is grown quite thin .
Is she ill ? ''
`` She is not well , she has had a nervous complaint on her for several weeks . ''
`` I am sorry for that .
At her time of life , any thing of an illness destroys the bloom for ever !
Her 's has been a very short one !
She was as handsome a girl last September , as I ever saw ; and as likely to attract the man .
There was something in her style of beauty , to please them particularly .
I remember Fanny used to say that she would marry sooner and better than you did ; not but what she is exceedingly fond of YOU , but so it happened to strike her .
She will be mistaken , however .
I question whether Marianne NOW , will marry a man worth more than five or six hundred a-year , at the utmost , and I am very much deceived if YOU do not do better .
Dorsetshire !
I know very little of Dorsetshire ; but , my dear Elinor , I shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it ; and I think I can answer for your having Fanny and myself among the earliest and best pleased of your visitors . ''
Elinor tried very seriously to convince him that there was no likelihood of her marrying Colonel Brandon ; but it was an expectation of too much pleasure to himself to be relinquished , and he was really resolved on seeking an intimacy with that gentleman , and promoting the marriage by every possible attention .
He had just compunction enough for having done nothing for his sisters himself , to be exceedingly anxious that everybody else should do a great deal ; and an offer from Colonel Brandon , or a legacy from Mrs .
Jennings , was the easiest means of atoning for his own neglect .
They were lucky enough to find Lady Middleton at home , and Sir John came in before their visit ended .
Abundance of civilities passed on all sides .
Sir John was ready to like anybody , and though Mr .
Dashwood did not seem to know much about horses , he soon set him down as a very good-natured fellow : while Lady Middleton saw enough of fashion in his appearance to think his acquaintance worth having ; and Mr .
Dashwood went away delighted with both .
`` I shall have a charming account to carry to Fanny , '' said he , as he walked back with his sister .
`` Lady Middleton is really a most elegant woman !
Such a woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to know .
And Mrs .
Jennings too , an exceedingly well-behaved woman , though not so elegant as her daughter .
Your sister need not have any scruple even of visiting HER , which , to say the truth , has been a little the case , and very naturally ; for we only knew that Mrs .
Jennings was the widow of a man who had got all his money in a low way ; and Fanny and Mrs .
Ferrars were both strongly prepossessed , that neither she nor her daughters were such kind of women as Fanny would like to associate with .
But now I can carry her a most satisfactory account of both . ''
CHAPTER 34 Mrs .
John Dashwood had so much confidence in her husband 's judgment , that she waited the very next day both on Mrs .
Jennings and her daughter ; and her confidence was rewarded by finding even the former , even the woman with whom her sisters were staying , by no means unworthy her notice ; and as for Lady Middleton , she found her one of the most charming women in the world !
Lady Middleton was equally pleased with Mrs .
Dashwood .
There was a kind of cold hearted selfishness on both sides , which mutually attracted them ; and they sympathised with each other in an insipid propriety of demeanor , and a general want of understanding .
The same manners , however , which recommended Mrs .
John Dashwood to the good opinion of Lady Middleton did not suit the fancy of Mrs .
Jennings , and to HER she appeared nothing more than a little proud-looking woman of uncordial address , who met her husband 's sisters without any affection , and almost without having anything to say to them ; for of the quarter of an hour bestowed on Berkeley Street , she sat at least seven minutes and a half in silence .
Elinor wanted very much to know , though she did not chuse to ask , whether Edward was then in town ; but nothing would have induced Fanny voluntarily to mention his name before her , till able to tell her that his marriage with Miss Morton was resolved on , or till her husband 's expectations on Colonel Brandon were answered ; because she believed them still so very much attached to each other , that they could not be too sedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion .
The intelligence however , which SHE would not give , soon flowed from another quarter .
Lucy came very shortly to claim Elinor 's compassion on being unable to see Edward , though he had arrived in town with Mr .
and Mrs .
Dashwood .
He dared not come to Bartlett 's Buildings for fear of detection , and though their mutual impatience to meet , was not to be told , they could do nothing at present but write .
Edward assured them himself of his being in town , within a very short time , by twice calling in Berkeley Street .
Twice was his card found on the table , when they returned from their morning 's engagements .
Elinor was pleased that he had called ; and still more pleased that she had missed him .
The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with the Middletons , that , though not much in the habit of giving anything , they determined to give them -- a dinner ; and soon after their acquaintance began , invited them to dine in Harley Street , where they had taken a very good house for three months .
Their sisters and Mrs .
Jennings were invited likewise , and John Dashwood was careful to secure Colonel Brandon , who , always glad to be where the Miss Dashwoods were , received his eager civilities with some surprise , but much more pleasure .
They were to meet Mrs .
Ferrars ; but Elinor could not learn whether her sons were to be of the party .
The expectation of seeing HER , however , was enough to make her interested in the engagement ; for though she could now meet Edward's mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised to attend such an introduction , though she could now see her with perfect indifference as to her opinion of herself , her desire of being in company with Mrs .
Ferrars , her curiosity to know what she was like , was as lively as ever .
The interest with which she thus anticipated the party , was soon afterwards increased , more powerfully than pleasantly , by her hearing that the Miss Steeles were also to be at it .
So well had they recommended themselves to Lady Middleton , so agreeable had their assiduities made them to her , that though Lucy was certainly not so elegant , and her sister not even genteel , she was as ready as Sir John to ask them to spend a week or two in Conduit Street ; and it happened to be particularly convenient to the Miss Steeles , as soon as the Dashwoods ' invitation was known , that their visit should begin a few days before the party took place .
Their claims to the notice of Mrs .
John Dashwood , as the nieces of the gentleman who for many years had had the care of her brother , might not have done much , however , towards procuring them seats at her table ; but as Lady Middleton 's guests they must be welcome ; and Lucy , who had long wanted to be personally known to the family , to have a nearer view of their characters and her own difficulties , and to have an opportunity of endeavouring to please them , had seldom been happier in her life , than she was on receiving Mrs .
John Dashwood 's card .
On Elinor its effect was very different .
She began immediately to determine , that Edward who lived with his mother , must be asked as his mother was , to a party given by his sister ; and to see him for the first time , after all that passed , in the company of Lucy ! -- she hardly knew how she could bear it !
These apprehensions , perhaps , were not founded entirely on reason , and certainly not at all on truth .
They were relieved however , not by her own recollection , but by the good will of Lucy , who believed herself to be inflicting a severe disappointment when she told her that Edward certainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday , and even hoped to be carrying the pain still farther by persuading her that he was kept away by the extreme affection for herself , which he could not conceal when they were together .
The important Tuesday came that was to introduce the two young ladies to this formidable mother-in-law .
`` Pity me , dear Miss Dashwood ! ''
said Lucy , as they walked up the stairs together -- for the Middletons arrived so directly after Mrs .
Jennings , that they all followed the servant at the same time -- '' There is nobody here but you , that can feel for me. -- I declare I can hardly stand .
Good gracious ! -- In a moment I shall see the person that all my happiness depends on -- that is to be my mother ! ''
-- Elinor could have given her immediate relief by suggesting the possibility of its being Miss Morton 's mother , rather than her own , whom they were about to behold ; but instead of doing that , she assured her , and with great sincerity , that she did pity her -- to the utter amazement of Lucy , who , though really uncomfortable herself , hoped at least to be an object of irrepressible envy to Elinor .
Mrs .
Ferrars was a little , thin woman , upright , even to formality , in her figure , and serious , even to sourness , in her aspect .
Her complexion was sallow ; and her features small , without beauty , and naturally without expression ; but a lucky contraction of the brow had rescued her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity , by giving it the strong characters of pride and ill nature .
She was not a woman of many words ; for , unlike people in general , she proportioned them to the number of her ideas ; and of the few syllables that did escape her , not one fell to the share of Miss Dashwood , whom she eyed with the spirited determination of disliking her at all events .
Elinor could not NOW be made unhappy by this behaviour. -- A few months ago it would have hurt her exceedingly ; but it was not in Mrs .
Ferrars ' power to distress her by it now ; -- and the difference of her manners to the Miss Steeles , a difference which seemed purposely made to humble her more , only amused her .
She could not but smile to see the graciousness of both mother and daughter towards the very person -- for Lucy was particularly distinguished -- whom of all others , had they known as much as she did , they would have been most anxious to mortify ; while she herself , who had comparatively no power to wound them , sat pointedly slighted by both .
But while she smiled at a graciousness so misapplied , she could not reflect on the mean-spirited folly from which it sprung , nor observe the studied attentions with which the Miss Steeles courted its continuance , without thoroughly despising them all four .
Lucy was all exultation on being so honorably distinguished ; and Miss Steele wanted only to be teazed about Dr .
Davies to be perfectly happy .
The dinner was a grand one , the servants were numerous , and every thing bespoke the Mistress 's inclination for show , and the Master 's ability to support it .
In spite of the improvements and additions which were making to the Norland estate , and in spite of its owner having once been within some thousand pounds of being obliged to sell out at a loss , nothing gave any symptom of that indigence which he had tried to infer from it ; -- no poverty of any kind , except of conversation , appeared -- but there , the deficiency was considerable .
John Dashwood had not much to say for himself that was worth hearing , and his wife had still less .
But there was no peculiar disgrace in this ; for it was very much the case with the chief of their visitors , who almost all laboured under one or other of these disqualifications for being agreeable -- Want of sense , either natural or improved -- want of elegance -- want of spirits -- or want of temper .
When the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after dinner , this poverty was particularly evident , for the gentlemen HAD supplied the discourse with some variety -- the variety of politics , inclosing land , and breaking horses -- but then it was all over ; and one subject only engaged the ladies till coffee came in , which was the comparative heights of Harry Dashwood , and Lady Middleton 's second son William , who were nearly of the same age .
Had both the children been there , the affair might have been determined too easily by measuring them at once ; but as Harry only was present , it was all conjectural assertion on both sides ; and every body had a right to be equally positive in their opinion , and to repeat it over and over again as often as they liked .
The parties stood thus : The two mothers , though each really convinced that her own son was the tallest , politely decided in favour of the other .
The two grandmothers , with not less partiality , but more sincerity , were equally earnest in support of their own descendant .
Lucy , who was hardly less anxious to please one parent than the other , thought the boys were both remarkably tall for their age , and could not conceive that there could be the smallest difference in the world between them ; and Miss Steele , with yet greater address gave it , as fast as she could , in favour of each .
Elinor , having once delivered her opinion on William 's side , by which she offended Mrs .
Ferrars and Fanny still more , did not see the necessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion ; and Marianne , when called on for her 's , offended them all , by declaring that she had no opinion to give , as she had never thought about it .
Before her removing from Norland , Elinor had painted a very pretty pair of screens for her sister-in-law , which being now just mounted and brought home , ornamented her present drawing room ; and these screens , catching the eye of John Dashwood on his following the other gentlemen into the room , were officiously handed by him to Colonel Brandon for his admiration .
`` These are done by my eldest sister , '' said he ; `` and you , as a man of taste , will , I dare say , be pleased with them .
I do not know whether you have ever happened to see any of her performances before , but she is in general reckoned to draw extremely well . ''
The Colonel , though disclaiming all pretensions to connoisseurship , warmly admired the screens , as he would have done any thing painted by Miss Dashwood ; and on the curiosity of the others being of course excited , they were handed round for general inspection .
Mrs .
Ferrars , not aware of their being Elinor 's work , particularly requested to look at them ; and after they had received gratifying testimony of Lady Middletons 's approbation , Fanny presented them to her mother , considerately informing her , at the same time , that they were done by Miss Dashwood .
`` Hum '' -- said Mrs .
Ferrars -- '' very pretty , '' -- and without regarding them at all , returned them to her daughter .
Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her mother had been quite rude enough , -- for , colouring a little , she immediately said , '' They are very pretty , ma'am -- a n't they ? ''
But then again , the dread of having been too civil , too encouraging herself , probably came over her , for she presently added , '' Do you not think they are something in Miss Morton 's style of painting , Ma'am ? -- She DOES paint most delightfully ! -- How beautifully her last landscape is done ! ''
`` Beautifully indeed !
But SHE does every thing well . ''
Marianne could not bear this. -- She was already greatly displeased with Mrs .
Ferrars ; and such ill-timed praise of another , at Elinor 's expense , though she had not any notion of what was principally meant by it , provoked her immediately to say with warmth , '' This is admiration of a very particular kind ! -- what is Miss Morton to us ? -- who knows , or who cares , for her ? -- it is Elinor of whom WE think and speak . ''
And so saying , she took the screens out of her sister-in-law 's hands , to admire them herself as they ought to be admired .
Mrs .
Ferrars looked exceedingly angry , and drawing herself up more stiffly than ever , pronounced in retort this bitter philippic , `` Miss Morton is Lord Morton 's daughter . ''
Fanny looked very angry too , and her husband was all in a fright at his sister 's audacity .
Elinor was much more hurt by Marianne 's warmth than she had been by what produced it ; but Colonel Brandon 's eyes , as they were fixed on Marianne , declared that he noticed only what was amiable in it , the affectionate heart which could not bear to see a sister slighted in the smallest point .
Marianne 's feelings did not stop here .
The cold insolence of Mrs .
Ferrars 's general behaviour to her sister , seemed , to her , to foretell such difficulties and distresses to Elinor , as her own wounded heart taught her to think of with horror ; and urged by a strong impulse of affectionate sensibility , she moved after a moment , to her sister 's chair , and putting one arm round her neck , and one cheek close to hers , said in a low , but eager , voice , '' Dear , dear Elinor , do n't mind them .
Do n't let them make YOU unhappy . ''
She could say no more ; her spirits were quite overcome , and hiding her face on Elinor 's shoulder , she burst into tears .
Every body 's attention was called , and almost every body was concerned. -- Colonel Brandon rose up and went to them without knowing what he did. -- Mrs .
Jennings , with a very intelligent `` Ah !
poor dear , '' immediately gave her her salts ; and Sir John felt so desperately enraged against the author of this nervous distress , that he instantly changed his seat to one close by Lucy Steele , and gave her , in a whisper , a brief account of the whole shocking affair .
In a few minutes , however , Marianne was recovered enough to put an end to the bustle , and sit down among the rest ; though her spirits retained the impression of what had passed , the whole evening .
`` Poor Marianne ! ''
said her brother to Colonel Brandon , in a low voice , as soon as he could secure his attention , -- '' She has not such good health as her sister , -- she is very nervous , -- she has not Elinor 's constitution ; -- and one must allow that there is something very trying to a young woman who HAS BEEN a beauty in the loss of her personal attractions .
You would not think it perhaps , but Marianne WAS remarkably handsome a few months ago ; quite as handsome as Elinor. -- Now you see it is all gone . ''
CHAPTER 35 Elinor 's curiosity to see Mrs .
Ferrars was satisfied. -- She had found in her every thing that could tend to make a farther connection between the families undesirable. -- She had seen enough of her pride , her meanness , and her determined prejudice against herself , to comprehend all the difficulties that must have perplexed the engagement , and retarded the marriage , of Edward and herself , had he been otherwise free ; -- and she had seen almost enough to be thankful for her OWN sake , that one greater obstacle preserved her from suffering under any other of Mrs .
Ferrars 's creation , preserved her from all dependence upon her caprice , or any solicitude for her good opinion .
Or at least , if she did not bring herself quite to rejoice in Edward 's being fettered to Lucy , she determined , that had Lucy been more amiable , she OUGHT to have rejoiced .
She wondered that Lucy 's spirits could be so very much elevated by the civility of Mrs .
Ferrars ; -- that her interest and her vanity should so very much blind her as to make the attention which seemed only paid her because she was NOT ELINOR , appear a compliment to herself -- or to allow her to derive encouragement from a preference only given her , because her real situation was unknown .
But that it was so , had not only been declared by Lucy 's eyes at the time , but was declared over again the next morning more openly , for at her particular desire , Lady Middleton set her down in Berkeley Street on the chance of seeing Elinor alone , to tell her how happy she was .
The chance proved a lucky one , for a message from Mrs .
Palmer soon after she arrived , carried Mrs .
Jennings away .
`` My dear friend , '' cried Lucy , as soon as they were by themselves , `` I come to talk to you of my happiness .
Could anything be so flattering as Mrs .
Ferrars 's way of treating me yesterday ?
So exceeding affable as she was ! -- You know how I dreaded the thoughts of seeing her ; -- but the very moment I was introduced , there was such an affability in her behaviour as really should seem to say , she had quite took a fancy to me .
Now was not it so ? -- You saw it all ; and was not you quite struck with it ? ''
`` She was certainly very civil to you . ''
`` Civil ! -- Did you see nothing but only civility ? -- I saw a vast deal more .
Such kindness as fell to the share of nobody but me ! -- No pride , no hauteur , and your sister just the same -- all sweetness and affability ! ''
Elinor wished to talk of something else , but Lucy still pressed her to own that she had reason for her happiness ; and Elinor was obliged to go on. -- '' Undoubtedly , if they had known your engagement , '' said she , `` nothing could be more flattering than their treatment of you ; -- but as that was not the case '' -- '' I guessed you would say so '' -- replied Lucy quickly -- '' but there was no reason in the world why Mrs .
Ferrars should seem to like me , if she did not , and her liking me is every thing .
You sha n't talk me out of my satisfaction .
I am sure it will all end well , and there will be no difficulties at all , to what I used to think .
Mrs .
Ferrars is a charming woman , and so is your sister .
They are both delightful women , indeed ! -- I wonder I should never hear you say how agreeable Mrs .
Dashwood was ! ''
To this Elinor had no answer to make , and did not attempt any .
`` Are you ill , Miss Dashwood ? -- you seem low -- you do n't speak ; -- sure you a n't well . ''
`` I never was in better health . ''
`` I am glad of it with all my heart ; but really you did not look it .
I should be sorry to have YOU ill ; you , that have been the greatest comfort to me in the world ! -- Heaven knows what I should have done without your friendship . ''
-- Elinor tried to make a civil answer , though doubting her own success .
But it seemed to satisfy Lucy , for she directly replied , '' Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your regard for me , and next to Edward 's love , it is the greatest comfort I have. -- Poor Edward ! -- But now there is one good thing , we shall be able to meet , and meet pretty often , for Lady Middleton 's delighted with Mrs .
Dashwood , so we shall be a good deal in Harley Street , I dare say , and Edward spends half his time with his sister -- besides , Lady Middleton and Mrs .
Ferrars will visit now ; -- and Mrs .
Ferrars and your sister were both so good to say more than once , they should always be glad to see me. -- They are such charming women ! -- I am sure if ever you tell your sister what I think of her , you can not speak too high . ''
But Elinor would not give her any encouragement to hope that she SHOULD tell her sister .
Lucy continued .
`` I am sure I should have seen it in a moment , if Mrs .
Ferrars had took a dislike to me .
If she had only made me a formal courtesy , for instance , without saying a word , and never after had took any notice of me , and never looked at me in a pleasant way -- you know what I mean -- if I had been treated in that forbidding sort of way , I should have gave it all up in despair .
I could not have stood it .
For where she DOES dislike , I know it is most violent . ''
Elinor was prevented from making any reply to this civil triumph , by the door 's being thrown open , the servant's announcing Mr .
Ferrars , and Edward 's immediately walking in .
It was a very awkward moment ; and the countenance of each shewed that it was so .
They all looked exceedingly foolish ; and Edward seemed to have as great an inclination to walk out of the room again , as to advance farther into it .
The very circumstance , in its unpleasantest form , which they would each have been most anxious to avoid , had fallen on them. -- They were not only all three together , but were together without the relief of any other person .
The ladies recovered themselves first .
It was not Lucy's business to put herself forward , and the appearance of secrecy must still be kept up .
She could therefore only LOOK her tenderness , and after slightly addressing him , said no more .
But Elinor had more to do ; and so anxious was she , for his sake and her own , to do it well , that she forced herself , after a moment 's recollection , to welcome him , with a look and manner that were almost easy , and almost open ; and another struggle , another effort still improved them .
She would not allow the presence of Lucy , nor the consciousness of some injustice towards herself , to deter her from saying that she was happy to see him , and that she had very much regretted being from home , when he called before in Berkeley Street .
She would not be frightened from paying him those attentions which , as a friend and almost a relation , were his due , by the observant eyes of Lucy , though she soon perceived them to be narrowly watching her .
Her manners gave some re-assurance to Edward , and he had courage enough to sit down ; but his embarrassment still exceeded that of the ladies in a proportion , which the case rendered reasonable , though his sex might make it rare ; for his heart had not the indifference of Lucy 's , nor could his conscience have quite the ease of Elinor 's .
Lucy , with a demure and settled air , seemed determined to make no contribution to the comfort of the others , and would not say a word ; and almost every thing that WAS said , proceeded from Elinor , who was obliged to volunteer all the information about her mother 's health , their coming to town , & c. which Edward ought to have inquired about , but never did .
Her exertions did not stop here ; for she soon afterwards felt herself so heroically disposed as to determine , under pretence of fetching Marianne , to leave the others by themselves ; and she really did it , and THAT in the handsomest manner , for she loitered away several minutes on the landing-place , with the most high-minded fortitude , before she went to her sister .
When that was once done , however , it was time for the raptures of Edward to cease ; for Marianne 's joy hurried her into the drawing-room immediately .
Her pleasure in seeing him was like every other of her feelings , strong in itself , and strongly spoken .
She met him with a hand that would be taken , and a voice that expressed the affection of a sister .
`` Dear Edward ! ''
she cried , `` this is a moment of great happiness ! -- This would almost make amends for every thing ? ''
Edward tried to return her kindness as it deserved , but before such witnesses he dared not say half what he really felt .
Again they all sat down , and for a moment or two all were silent ; while Marianne was looking with the most speaking tenderness , sometimes at Edward and sometimes at Elinor , regretting only that their delight in each other should be checked by Lucy 's unwelcome presence .
Edward was the first to speak , and it was to notice Marianne 's altered looks , and express his fear of her not finding London agree with her .
`` Oh , do n't think of me ! ''
she replied with spirited earnestness , though her eyes were filled with tears as she spoke , `` do n't think of MY health .
Elinor is well , you see .
That must be enough for us both . ''
This remark was not calculated to make Edward or Elinor more easy , nor to conciliate the good will of Lucy , who looked up at Marianne with no very benignant expression .
`` Do you like London ? ''
said Edward , willing to say any thing that might introduce another subject .
`` Not at all .
I expected much pleasure in it , but I have found none .
The sight of you , Edward , is the only comfort it has afforded ; and thank Heaven !
you are what you always were ! ''
She paused -- no one spoke .
`` I think , Elinor , '' she presently added , `` we must employ Edward to take care of us in our return to Barton .
In a week or two , I suppose , we shall be going ; and , I trust , Edward will not be very unwilling to accept the charge . ''
Poor Edward muttered something , but what it was , nobody knew , not even himself .
But Marianne , who saw his agitation , and could easily trace it to whatever cause best pleased herself , was perfectly satisfied , and soon talked of something else .
`` We spent such a day , Edward , in Harley Street yesterday !
So dull , so wretchedly dull ! -- But I have much to say to you on that head , which can not be said now . ''
And with this admirable discretion did she defer the assurance of her finding their mutual relatives more disagreeable than ever , and of her being particularly disgusted with his mother , till they were more in private .
`` But why were you not there , Edward ? -- Why did you not come ? ''
`` I was engaged elsewhere . ''
`` Engaged !
But what was that , when such friends were to be met ? ''
`` Perhaps , Miss Marianne , '' cried Lucy , eager to take some revenge on her , `` you think young men never stand upon engagements , if they have no mind to keep them , little as well as great . ''
Elinor was very angry , but Marianne seemed entirely insensible of the sting ; for she calmly replied , '' Not so , indeed ; for , seriously speaking , I am very sure that conscience only kept Edward from Harley Street .
And I really believe he HAS the most delicate conscience in the world ; the most scrupulous in performing every engagement , however minute , and however it may make against his interest or pleasure .
He is the most fearful of giving pain , of wounding expectation , and the most incapable of being selfish , of any body I ever saw .
Edward , it is so , and I will say it .
What !
are you never to hear yourself praised ! -- Then you must be no friend of mine ; for those who will accept of my love and esteem , must submit to my open commendation . ''
The nature of her commendation , in the present case , however , happened to be particularly ill-suited to the feelings of two thirds of her auditors , and was so very unexhilarating to Edward , that he very soon got up to go away .
`` Going so soon ! ''
said Marianne ; `` my dear Edward , this must not be . ''
And drawing him a little aside , she whispered her persuasion that Lucy could not stay much longer .
But even this encouragement failed , for he would go ; and Lucy , who would have outstaid him , had his visit lasted two hours , soon afterwards went away .
`` What can bring her here so often ? ''
said Marianne , on her leaving them .
`` Could not she see that we wanted her gone ! -- how teazing to Edward ! ''
`` Why so ? -- we were all his friends , and Lucy has been the longest known to him of any .
It is but natural that he should like to see her as well as ourselves . ''
Marianne looked at her steadily , and said , `` You know , Elinor , that this is a kind of talking which I can not bear .
If you only hope to have your assertion contradicted , as I must suppose to be the case , you ought to recollect that I am the last person in the world to do it .
I can not descend to be tricked out of assurances , that are not really wanted . ''
She then left the room ; and Elinor dared not follow her to say more , for bound as she was by her promise of secrecy to Lucy , she could give no information that would convince Marianne ; and painful as the consequences of her still continuing in an error might be , she was obliged to submit to it .
All that she could hope , was that Edward would not often expose her or himself to the distress of hearing Marianne 's mistaken warmth , nor to the repetition of any other part of the pain that had attended their recent meeting -- and this she had every reason to expect .
CHAPTER 36 Within a few days after this meeting , the newspapers announced to the world , that the lady of Thomas Palmer , Esq .
was safely delivered of a son and heir ; a very interesting and satisfactory paragraph , at least to all those intimate connections who knew it before .
This event , highly important to Mrs .
Jennings 's happiness , produced a temporary alteration in the disposal of her time , and influenced , in a like degree , the engagements of her young friends ; for as she wished to be as much as possible with Charlotte , she went thither every morning as soon as she was dressed , and did not return till late in the evening ; and the Miss Dashwoods , at the particular request of the Middletons , spent the whole of every day , in every day in Conduit Street .
For their own comfort they would much rather have remained , at least all the morning , in Mrs .
Jennings 's house ; but it was not a thing to be urged against the wishes of everybody .
Their hours were therefore made over to Lady Middleton and the two Miss Steeles , by whom their company , in fact was as little valued , as it was professedly sought .
They had too much sense to be desirable companions to the former ; and by the latter they were considered with a jealous eye , as intruding on THEIR ground , and sharing the kindness which they wanted to monopolize .
Though nothing could be more polite than Lady Middleton 's behaviour to Elinor and Marianne , she did not really like them at all .
Because they neither flattered herself nor her children , she could not believe them good-natured ; and because they were fond of reading , she fancied them satirical : perhaps without exactly knowing what it was to be satirical ; but THAT did not signify .
It was censure in common use , and easily given .
Their presence was a restraint both on her and on Lucy .
It checked the idleness of one , and the business of the other .
Lady Middleton was ashamed of doing nothing before them , and the flattery which Lucy was proud to think of and administer at other times , she feared they would despise her for offering .
Miss Steele was the least discomposed of the three , by their presence ; and it was in their power to reconcile her to it entirely .
Would either of them only have given her a full and minute account of the whole affair between Marianne and Mr .
Willoughby , she would have thought herself amply rewarded for the sacrifice of the best place by the fire after dinner , which their arrival occasioned .
But this conciliation was not granted ; for though she often threw out expressions of pity for her sister to Elinor , and more than once dropt a reflection on the inconstancy of beaux before Marianne , no effect was produced , but a look of indifference from the former , or of disgust in the latter .
An effort even yet lighter might have made her their friend .
Would they only have laughed at her about the Doctor !
But so little were they , anymore than the others , inclined to oblige her , that if Sir John dined from home , she might spend a whole day without hearing any other raillery on the subject , than what she was kind enough to bestow on herself .
All these jealousies and discontents , however , were so totally unsuspected by Mrs .
Jennings , that she thought it a delightful thing for the girls to be together ; and generally congratulated her young friends every night , on having escaped the company of a stupid old woman so long .
She joined them sometimes at Sir John 's , sometimes at her own house ; but wherever it was , she always came in excellent spirits , full of delight and importance , attributing Charlotte 's well doing to her own care , and ready to give so exact , so minute a detail of her situation , as only Miss Steele had curiosity enough to desire .
One thing DID disturb her ; and of that she made her daily complaint .
Mr .
Palmer maintained the common , but unfatherly opinion among his sex , of all infants being alike ; and though she could plainly perceive , at different times , the most striking resemblance between this baby and every one of his relations on both sides , there was no convincing his father of it ; no persuading him to believe that it was not exactly like every other baby of the same age ; nor could he even be brought to acknowledge the simple proposition of its being the finest child in the world .
I come now to the relation of a misfortune , which about this time befell Mrs .
John Dashwood .
It so happened that while her two sisters with Mrs .
Jennings were first calling on her in Harley Street , another of her acquaintance had dropt in -- a circumstance in itself not apparently likely to produce evil to her .
But while the imaginations of other people will carry them away to form wrong judgments of our conduct , and to decide on it by slight appearances , one 's happiness must in some measure be always at the mercy of chance .
In the present instance , this last-arrived lady allowed her fancy to so far outrun truth and probability , that on merely hearing the name of the Miss Dashwoods , and understanding them to be Mr .
Dashwood 's sisters , she immediately concluded them to be staying in Harley Street ; and this misconstruction produced within a day or two afterwards , cards of invitation for them as well as for their brother and sister , to a small musical party at her house .
The consequence of which was , that Mrs .
John Dashwood was obliged to submit not only to the exceedingly great inconvenience of sending her carriage for the Miss Dashwoods , but , what was still worse , must be subject to all the unpleasantness of appearing to treat them with attention : and who could tell that they might not expect to go out with her a second time ?
The power of disappointing them , it was true , must always be her 's .
But that was not enough ; for when people are determined on a mode of conduct which they know to be wrong , they feel injured by the expectation of any thing better from them .
Marianne had now been brought by degrees , so much into the habit of going out every day , that it was become a matter of indifference to her , whether she went or not : and she prepared quietly and mechanically for every evening 's engagement , though without expecting the smallest amusement from any , and very often without knowing , till the last moment , where it was to take her .
To her dress and appearance she was grown so perfectly indifferent , as not to bestow half the consideration on it , during the whole of her toilet , which it received from Miss Steele in the first five minutes of their being together , when it was finished .
Nothing escaped HER minute observation and general curiosity ; she saw every thing , and asked every thing ; was never easy till she knew the price of every part of Marianne 's dress ; could have guessed the number of her gowns altogether with better judgment than Marianne herself , and was not without hopes of finding out before they parted , how much her washing cost per week , and how much she had every year to spend upon herself .
The impertinence of these kind of scrutinies , moreover , was generally concluded with a compliment , which though meant as its douceur , was considered by Marianne as the greatest impertinence of all ; for after undergoing an examination into the value and make of her gown , the colour of her shoes , and the arrangement of her hair , she was almost sure of being told that upon `` her word she looked vastly smart , and she dared to say she would make a great many conquests . ''
With such encouragement as this , was she dismissed on the present occasion , to her brother 's carriage ; which they were ready to enter five minutes after it stopped at the door , a punctuality not very agreeable to their sister-in-law , who had preceded them to the house of her acquaintance , and was there hoping for some delay on their part that might inconvenience either herself or her coachman .
The events of this evening were not very remarkable .
The party , like other musical parties , comprehended a great many people who had real taste for the performance , and a great many more who had none at all ; and the performers themselves were , as usual , in their own estimation , and that of their immediate friends , the first private performers in England .
As Elinor was neither musical , nor affecting to be so , she made no scruple of turning her eyes from the grand pianoforte , whenever it suited her , and unrestrained even by the presence of a harp , and violoncello , would fix them at pleasure on any other object in the room .
In one of these excursive glances she perceived among a group of young men , the very he , who had given them a lecture on toothpick-cases at Gray 's .
She perceived him soon afterwards looking at herself , and speaking familiarly to her brother ; and had just determined to find out his name from the latter , when they both came towards her , and Mr .
Dashwood introduced him to her as Mr .
Robert Ferrars .
He addressed her with easy civility , and twisted his head into a bow which assured her as plainly as words could have done , that he was exactly the coxcomb she had heard him described to be by Lucy .
Happy had it been for her , if her regard for Edward had depended less on his own merit , than on the merit of his nearest relations !
For then his brother 's bow must have given the finishing stroke to what the ill-humour of his mother and sister would have begun .
But while she wondered at the difference of the two young men , she did not find that the emptiness of conceit of the one , put her out of all charity with the modesty and worth of the other .
Why they WERE different , Robert exclaimed to her himself in the course of a quarter of an hour 's conversation ; for , talking of his brother , and lamenting the extreme GAUCHERIE which he really believed kept him from mixing in proper society , he candidly and generously attributed it much less to any natural deficiency , than to the misfortune of a private education ; while he himself , though probably without any particular , any material superiority by nature , merely from the advantage of a public school , was as well fitted to mix in the world as any other man .
`` Upon my soul , '' he added , `` I believe it is nothing more ; and so I often tell my mother , when she is grieving about it .
'My dear Madam , ' I always say to her , 'you must make yourself easy .
The evil is now irremediable , and it has been entirely your own doing .
Why would you be persuaded by my uncle , Sir Robert , against your own judgment , to place Edward under private tuition , at the most critical time of his life ?
If you had only sent him to Westminster as well as myself , instead of sending him to Mr .
Pratt 's , all this would have been prevented . '
This is the way in which I always consider the matter , and my mother is perfectly convinced of her error . ''
Elinor would not oppose his opinion , because , whatever might be her general estimation of the advantage of a public school , she could not think of Edward's abode in Mr .
Pratt 's family , with any satisfaction .
`` You reside in Devonshire , I think , '' -- was his next observation , `` in a cottage near Dawlish . ''
Elinor set him right as to its situation ; and it seemed rather surprising to him that anybody could live in Devonshire , without living near Dawlish .
He bestowed his hearty approbation however on their species of house .
`` For my own part , '' said he , `` I am excessively fond of a cottage ; there is always so much comfort , so much elegance about them .
And I protest , if I had any money to spare , I should buy a little land and build one myself , within a short distance of London , where I might drive myself down at any time , and collect a few friends about me , and be happy .
I advise every body who is going to build , to build a cottage .
My friend Lord Courtland came to me the other day on purpose to ask my advice , and laid before me three different plans of Bonomi 's .
I was to decide on the best of them .
'My dear Courtland , ' said I , immediately throwing them all into the fire , 'do not adopt either of them , but by all means build a cottage . '
And that I fancy , will be the end of it .
`` Some people imagine that there can be no accommodations , no space in a cottage ; but this is all a mistake .
I was last month at my friend Elliott 's , near Dartford .
Lady Elliott wished to give a dance .
'But how can it be done ? '
said she ; 'my dear Ferrars , do tell me how it is to be managed .
There is not a room in this cottage that will hold ten couple , and where can the supper be ? '
I immediately saw that there could be no difficulty in it , so I said , 'My dear Lady Elliott , do not be uneasy .
The dining parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease ; card-tables may be placed in the drawing-room ; the library may be open for tea and other refreshments ; and let the supper be set out in the saloon . '
Lady Elliott was delighted with the thought .
We measured the dining-room , and found it would hold exactly eighteen couple , and the affair was arranged precisely after my plan .
So that , in fact , you see , if people do but know how to set about it , every comfort may be as well enjoyed in a cottage as in the most spacious dwelling . ''
Elinor agreed to it all , for she did not think he deserved the compliment of rational opposition .
As John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music than his eldest sister , his mind was equally at liberty to fix on any thing else ; and a thought struck him during the evening , which he communicated to his wife , for her approbation , when they got home .
The consideration of Mrs .
Dennison's mistake , in supposing his sisters their guests , had suggested the propriety of their being really invited to become such , while Mrs .
Jenning 's engagements kept her from home .
The expense would be nothing , the inconvenience not more ; and it was altogether an attention which the delicacy of his conscience pointed out to be requisite to its complete enfranchisement from his promise to his father .
Fanny was startled at the proposal .
`` I do not see how it can be done , '' said she , '' without affronting Lady Middleton , for they spend every day with her ; otherwise I should be exceedingly glad to do it .
You know I am always ready to pay them any attention in my power , as my taking them out this evening shews .
But they are Lady Middleton 's visitors .
How can I ask them away from her ? ''
Her husband , but with great humility , did not see the force of her objection .
`` They had already spent a week in this manner in Conduit Street , and Lady Middleton could not be displeased at their giving the same number of days to such near relations . ''
Fanny paused a moment , and then , with fresh vigor , said , '' My love I would ask them with all my heart , if it was in my power .
But I had just settled within myself to ask the Miss Steeles to spend a few days with us .
They are very well behaved , good kind of girls ; and I think the attention is due to them , as their uncle did so very well by Edward .
We can ask your sisters some other year , you know ; but the Miss Steeles may not be in town any more .
I am sure you will like them ; indeed , you DO like them , you know , very much already , and so does my mother ; and they are such favourites with Harry ! ''
Mr .
Dashwood was convinced .
He saw the necessity of inviting the Miss Steeles immediately , and his conscience was pacified by the resolution of inviting his sisters another year ; at the same time , however , slyly suspecting that another year would make the invitation needless , by bringing Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon 's wife , and Marianne as THEIR visitor .
Fanny , rejoicing in her escape , and proud of the ready wit that had procured it , wrote the next morning to Lucy , to request her company and her sister 's , for some days , in Harley Street , as soon as Lady Middleton could spare them .
This was enough to make Lucy really and reasonably happy .
Mrs .
Dashwood seemed actually working for her , herself ; cherishing all her hopes , and promoting all her views !
Such an opportunity of being with Edward and his family was , above all things , the most material to her interest , and such an invitation the most gratifying to her feelings !
It was an advantage that could not be too gratefully acknowledged , nor too speedily made use of ; and the visit to Lady Middleton , which had not before had any precise limits , was instantly discovered to have been always meant to end in two days ' time .
When the note was shown to Elinor , as it was within ten minutes after its arrival , it gave her , for the first time , some share in the expectations of Lucy ; for such a mark of uncommon kindness , vouchsafed on so short an acquaintance , seemed to declare that the good-will towards her arose from something more than merely malice against herself ; and might be brought , by time and address , to do every thing that Lucy wished .
Her flattery had already subdued the pride of Lady Middleton , and made an entry into the close heart of Mrs .
John Dashwood ; and these were effects that laid open the probability of greater .
The Miss Steeles removed to Harley Street , and all that reached Elinor of their influence there , strengthened her expectation of the event .
Sir John , who called on them more than once , brought home such accounts of the favour they were in , as must be universally striking .
Mrs .
Dashwood had never been so much pleased with any young women in her life , as she was with them ; had given each of them a needle book made by some emigrant ; called Lucy by her Christian name ; and did not know whether she should ever be able to part with them .
[ At this point in the first and second edtions , Volume II ended . ]
CHAPTER 37 Mrs .
Palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight , that her mother felt it no longer necessary to give up the whole of her time to her ; and , contenting herself with visiting her once or twice a day , returned from that period to her own home , and her own habits , in which she found the Miss Dashwoods very ready to resume their former share .
About the third or fourth morning after their being thus resettled in Berkeley Street , Mrs .
Jennings , on returning from her ordinary visit to Mrs .
Palmer , entered the drawing-room , where Elinor was sitting by herself , with an air of such hurrying importance as prepared her to hear something wonderful ; and giving her time only to form that idea , began directly to justify it , by saying , '' Lord !
my dear Miss Dashwood !
have you heard the news ? ''
`` No , ma'am .
What is it ? ''
`` Something so strange !
But you shall hear it all. -- When I got to Mr .
Palmer 's , I found Charlotte quite in a fuss about the child .
She was sure it was very ill -- it cried , and fretted , and was all over pimples .
So I looked at it directly , and , 'Lord !
my dear , ' says I , 'it is nothing in the world , but the red gum -- ' and nurse said just the same .
But Charlotte , she would not be satisfied , so Mr .
Donavan was sent for ; and luckily he happened to just come in from Harley Street , so he stepped over directly , and as soon as ever he saw the child , be said just as we did , that it was nothing in the world but the red gum , and then Charlotte was easy .
And so , just as he was going away again , it came into my head , I am sure I do not know how I happened to think of it , but it came into my head to ask him if there was any news .
So upon that , he smirked , and simpered , and looked grave , and seemed to know something or other , and at last he said in a whisper , 'For fear any unpleasant report should reach the young ladies under your care as to their sister 's indisposition , I think it advisable to say , that I believe there is no great reason for alarm ; I hope Mrs .
Dashwood will do very well . ' ''
`` What !
is Fanny ill ? ''
`` That is exactly what I said , my dear .
'Lord ! '
says I , 'is Mrs .
Dashwood ill ? '
So then it all came out ; and the long and the short of the matter , by all I can learn , seems to be this .
Mr .
Edward Ferrars , the very young man I used to joke with you about ( but however , as it turns out , I am monstrous glad there was never any thing in it ) , Mr .
Edward Ferrars , it seems , has been engaged above this twelvemonth to my cousin Lucy ! -- There 's for you , my dear ! -- And not a creature knowing a syllable of the matter , except Nancy ! -- Could you have believed such a thing possible ? -- There is no great wonder in their liking one another ; but that matters should be brought so forward between them , and nobody suspect it ! -- THAT is strange ! -- I never happened to see them together , or I am sure I should have found it out directly .
Well , and so this was kept a great secret , for fear of Mrs .
Ferrars , and neither she nor your brother or sister suspected a word of the matter ; -- till this very morning , poor Nancy , who , you know , is a well-meaning creature , but no conjurer , popt it all out .
'Lord ! '
thinks she to herself , 'they are all so fond of Lucy , to be sure they will make no difficulty about it ; ' and so , away she went to your sister , who was sitting all alone at her carpet-work , little suspecting what was to come -- for she had just been saying to your brother , only five minutes before , that she thought to make a match between Edward and some Lord 's daughter or other , I forget who .
So you may think what a blow it was to all her vanity and pride .
She fell into violent hysterics immediately , with such screams as reached your brother 's ears , as he was sitting in his own dressing-room down stairs , thinking about writing a letter to his steward in the country .
So up he flew directly , and a terrible scene took place , for Lucy was come to them by that time , little dreaming what was going on .
Poor soul !
I pity HER .
And I must say , I think she was used very hardly ; for your sister scolded like any fury , and soon drove her into a fainting fit .
Nancy , she fell upon her knees , and cried bitterly ; and your brother , he walked about the room , and said he did not know what to do .
Mrs .
Dashwood declared they should not stay a minute longer in the house , and your brother was forced to go down upon HIS knees too , to persuade her to let them stay till they had packed up their clothes .
THEN she fell into hysterics again , and he was so frightened that he would send for Mr .
Donavan , and Mr .
Donavan found the house in all this uproar .
The carriage was at the door ready to take my poor cousins away , and they were just stepping in as he came off ; poor Lucy in such a condition , he says , she could hardly walk ; and Nancy , she was almost as bad .
I declare , I have no patience with your sister ; and I hope , with all my heart , it will be a match in spite of her .
Lord !
what a taking poor Mr .
Edward will be in when he hears of it !
To have his love used so scornfully !
for they say he is monstrous fond of her , as well he may .
I should not wonder , if he was to be in the greatest passion ! -- and Mr .
Donavan thinks just the same .
He and I had a great deal of talk about it ; and the best of all is , that he is gone back again to Harley Street , that he may be within call when Mrs .
Ferrars is told of it , for she was sent for as soon as ever my cousins left the house , for your sister was sure SHE would be in hysterics too ; and so she may , for what I care .
I have no pity for either of them .
I have no notion of people 's making such a to-do about money and greatness .
There is no reason on earth why Mr .
Edward and Lucy should not marry ; for I am sure Mrs .
Ferrars may afford to do very well by her son , and though Lucy has next to nothing herself , she knows better than any body how to make the most of every thing ; I dare say , if Mrs .
Ferrars would only allow him five hundred a-year , she would make as good an appearance with it as any body else would with eight .
Lord !
how snug they might live in such another cottage as yours -- or a little bigger -- with two maids , and two men ; and I believe I could help them to a housemaid , for my Betty has a sister out of place , that would fit them exactly . ''
Here Mrs .
Jennings ceased , and as Elinor had had time enough to collect her thoughts , she was able to give such an answer , and make such observations , as the subject might naturally be supposed to produce .
Happy to find that she was not suspected of any extraordinary interest in it ; that Mrs .
Jennings ( as she had of late often hoped might be the case ) had ceased to imagine her at all attached to Edward ; and happy above all the rest , in the absence of Marianne , she felt very well able to speak of the affair without embarrassment , and to give her judgment , as she believed , with impartiality on the conduct of every one concerned in it .
She could hardly determine what her own expectation of its event really was ; though she earnestly tried to drive away the notion of its being possible to end otherwise at last , than in the marriage of Edward and Lucy .
What Mrs .
Ferrars would say and do , though there could not be a doubt of its nature , she was anxious to hear ; and still more anxious to know how Edward would conduct himself .
For HIM she felt much compassion ; -- for Lucy very little -- and it cost her some pains to procure that little ; -- for the rest of the party none at all .
As Mrs .
Jennings could talk on no other subject , Elinor soon saw the necessity of preparing Marianne for its discussion .
No time was to be lost in undeceiving her , in making her acquainted with the real truth , and in endeavouring to bring her to hear it talked of by others , without betraying that she felt any uneasiness for her sister , or any resentment against Edward .
Elinor 's office was a painful one. -- She was going to remove what she really believed to be her sister's chief consolation , -- to give such particulars of Edward as she feared would ruin him for ever in her good opinion , -and to make Marianne , by a resemblance in their situations , which to HER fancy would seem strong , feel all her own disappointment over again .
But unwelcome as such a task must be , it was necessary to be done , and Elinor therefore hastened to perform it .
She was very far from wishing to dwell on her own feelings , or to represent herself as suffering much , any otherwise than as the self-command she had practised since her first knowledge of Edward 's engagement , might suggest a hint of what was practicable to Marianne .
Her narration was clear and simple ; and though it could not be given without emotion , it was not accompanied by violent agitation , nor impetuous grief. -- THAT belonged rather to the hearer , for Marianne listened with horror , and cried excessively .
Elinor was to be the comforter of others in her own distresses , no less than in theirs ; and all the comfort that could be given by assurances of her own composure of mind , and a very earnest vindication of Edward from every charge but of imprudence , was readily offered .
But Marianne for some time would give credit to neither .
Edward seemed a second Willoughby ; and acknowledging as Elinor did , that she HAD loved him most sincerely , could she feel less than herself !
As for Lucy Steele , she considered her so totally unamiable , so absolutely incapable of attaching a sensible man , that she could not be persuaded at first to believe , and afterwards to pardon , any former affection of Edward for her .
She would not even admit it to have been natural ; and Elinor left her to be convinced that it was so , by that which only could convince her , a better knowledge of mankind .
Her first communication had reached no farther than to state the fact of the engagement , and the length of time it had existed. -- Marianne 's feelings had then broken in , and put an end to all regularity of detail ; and for some time all that could be done was to soothe her distress , lessen her alarms , and combat her resentment .
The first question on her side , which led to farther particulars , was , '' How long has this been known to you , Elinor ?
has he written to you ? ''
`` I have known it these four months .
When Lucy first came to Barton Park last November , she told me in confidence of her engagement . ''
At these words , Marianne 's eyes expressed the astonishment which her lips could not utter .
After a pause of wonder , she exclaimed -- '' Four months ! -- Have you known of this four months ? ''
Elinor confirmed it .
`` What ! -- while attending me in all my misery , has this been on your heart ? -- And I have reproached you for being happy ! ''
-- '' It was not fit that you should then know how much I was the reverse ! ''
`` Four months ! ''
-- cried Marianne again. -- '' So calm ! -- so cheerful ! -- how have you been supported ? ''
-- '' By feeling that I was doing my duty. -- My promise to Lucy , obliged me to be secret .
I owed it to her , therefore , to avoid giving any hint of the truth ; and I owed it to my family and friends , not to create in them a solicitude about me , which it could not be in my power to satisfy . ''
Marianne seemed much struck .
`` I have very often wished to undeceive yourself and my mother , '' added Elinor ; `` and once or twice I have attempted it ; -- but without betraying my trust , I never could have convinced you . ''
`` Four months ! -- and yet you loved him ! ''
-- '' Yes .
But I did not love only him ; -- and while the comfort of others was dear to me , I was glad to spare them from knowing how much I felt .
Now , I can think and speak of it with little emotion .
I would not have you suffer on my account ; for I assure you I no longer suffer materially myself .
I have many things to support me .
I am not conscious of having provoked the disappointment by any imprudence of my own , I have borne it as much as possible without spreading it farther .
I acquit Edward of essential misconduct .
I wish him very happy ; and I am so sure of his always doing his duty , that though now he may harbour some regret , in the end he must become so .
Lucy does not want sense , and that is the foundation on which every thing good may be built. -- And after all , Marianne , after all that is bewitching in the idea of a single and constant attachment , and all that can be said of one 's happiness depending entirely on any particular person , it is not meant -- it is not fit -- it is not possible that it should be so. -- Edward will marry Lucy ; he will marry a woman superior in person and understanding to half her sex ; and time and habit will teach him to forget that he ever thought another superior to HER . ''
-- '' If such is your way of thinking , '' said Marianne , '' if the loss of what is most valued is so easily to be made up by something else , your resolution , your self-command , are , perhaps , a little less to be wondered at. -- They are brought more within my comprehension . ''
`` I understand you. -- You do not suppose that I have ever felt much. -- For four months , Marianne , I have had all this hanging on my mind , without being at liberty to speak of it to a single creature ; knowing that it would make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it were explained to you , yet unable to prepare you for it in the least. -- It was told me , -- it was in a manner forced on me by the very person herself , whose prior engagement ruined all my prospects ; and told me , as I thought , with triumph. -- This person 's suspicions , therefore , I have had to oppose , by endeavouring to appear indifferent where I have been most deeply interested ; -- and it has not been only once ; -- I have had her hopes and exultation to listen to again and again. -- I have known myself to be divided from Edward for ever , without hearing one circumstance that could make me less desire the connection. -- Nothing has proved him unworthy ; nor has anything declared him indifferent to me. -- I have had to contend against the unkindness of his sister , and the insolence of his mother ; and have suffered the punishment of an attachment , without enjoying its advantages. -- And all this has been going on at a time , when , as you know too well , it has not been my only unhappiness. -- If you can think me capable of ever feeling -- surely you may suppose that I have suffered NOW .
The composure of mind with which I have brought myself at present to consider the matter , the consolation that I have been willing to admit , have been the effect of constant and painful exertion ; -- they did not spring up of themselves ; -- they did not occur to relieve my spirits at first. -- No , Marianne. -- THEN , if I had not been bound to silence , perhaps nothing could have kept me entirely -- not even what I owed to my dearest friends -- from openly shewing that I was VERY unhappy . ''
-- Marianne was quite subdued. -- '' Oh !
Elinor , '' she cried , `` you have made me hate myself for ever. -- How barbarous have I been to you ! -- you , who have been my only comfort , who have borne with me in all my misery , who have seemed to be only suffering for me ! -- Is this my gratitude ? -- Is this the only return I can make you ? -- Because your merit cries out upon myself , I have been trying to do it away . ''
The tenderest caresses followed this confession .
In such a frame of mind as she was now in , Elinor had no difficulty in obtaining from her whatever promise she required ; and at her request , Marianne engaged never to speak of the affair to any one with the least appearance of bitterness ; -- to meet Lucy without betraying the smallest increase of dislike to her ; -- and even to see Edward himself , if chance should bring them together , without any diminution of her usual cordiality. -- These were great concessions ; -- but where Marianne felt that she had injured , no reparation could be too much for her to make .
She performed her promise of being discreet , to admiration. -- She attended to all that Mrs .
Jennings had to say upon the subject , with an unchanging complexion , dissented from her in nothing , and was heard three times to say , `` Yes , ma'am . ''
-- She listened to her praise of Lucy with only moving from one chair to another , and when Mrs .
Jennings talked of Edward 's affection , it cost her only a spasm in her throat. -- Such advances towards heroism in her sister , made Elinor feel equal to any thing herself .
The next morning brought a farther trial of it , in a visit from their brother , who came with a most serious aspect to talk over the dreadful affair , and bring them news of his wife .
`` You have heard , I suppose , '' said he with great solemnity , as soon as he was seated , `` of the very shocking discovery that took place under our roof yesterday . ''
They all looked their assent ; it seemed too awful a moment for speech .
`` Your sister , '' he continued , `` has suffered dreadfully .
Mrs .
Ferrars too -- in short it has been a scene of such complicated distress -- but I will hope that the storm may be weathered without our being any of us quite overcome .
Poor Fanny !
she was in hysterics all yesterday .
But I would not alarm you too much .
Donavan says there is nothing materially to be apprehended ; her constitution is a good one , and her resolution equal to any thing .
She has borne it all , with the fortitude of an angel !
She says she never shall think well of anybody again ; and one can not wonder at it , after being so deceived ! -- meeting with such ingratitude , where so much kindness had been shewn , so much confidence had been placed !
It was quite out of the benevolence of her heart , that she had asked these young women to her house ; merely because she thought they deserved some attention , were harmless , well-behaved girls , and would be pleasant companions ; for otherwise we both wished very much to have invited you and Marianne to be with us , while your kind friend there , was attending her daughter .
And now to be so rewarded !
' I wish , with all my heart , ' says poor Fanny in her affectionate way , 'that we had asked your sisters instead of them . ' ''
Here he stopped to be thanked ; which being done , he went on .
`` What poor Mrs .
Ferrars suffered , when first Fanny broke it to her , is not to be described .
While she with the truest affection had been planning a most eligible connection for him , was it to be supposed that he could be all the time secretly engaged to another person ! -- such a suspicion could never have entered her head !
If she suspected ANY prepossession elsewhere , it could not be in THAT quarter .
'THERE , to be sure , ' said she , ' I might have thought myself safe . '
She was quite in an agony .
We consulted together , however , as to what should be done , and at last she determined to send for Edward .
He came .
But I am sorry to relate what ensued .
All that Mrs .
Ferrars could say to make him put an end to the engagement , assisted too as you may well suppose by my arguments , and Fanny 's entreaties , was of no avail .
Duty , affection , every thing was disregarded .
I never thought Edward so stubborn , so unfeeling before .
His mother explained to him her liberal designs , in case of his marrying Miss Morton ; told him she would settle on him the Norfolk estate , which , clear of land-tax , brings in a good thousand a-year ; offered even , when matters grew desperate , to make it twelve hundred ; and in opposition to this , if he still persisted in this low connection , represented to him the certain penury that must attend the match .
His own two thousand pounds she protested should be his all ; she would never see him again ; and so far would she be from affording him the smallest assistance , that if he were to enter into any profession with a view of better support , she would do all in her power to prevent him advancing in it . ''
Here Marianne , in an ecstasy of indignation , clapped her hands together , and cried , `` Gracious God !
can this be possible ! ''
`` Well may you wonder , Marianne , '' replied her brother , '' at the obstinacy which could resist such arguments as these .
Your exclamation is very natural . ''
Marianne was going to retort , but she remembered her promises , and forbore .
`` All this , however , '' he continued , `` was urged in vain .
Edward said very little ; but what he did say , was in the most determined manner .
Nothing should prevail on him to give up his engagement .
He would stand to it , cost him what it might . ''
`` Then , '' cried Mrs .
Jennings with blunt sincerity , no longer able to be silent , `` he has acted like an honest man !
I beg your pardon , Mr .
Dashwood , but if he had done otherwise , I should have thought him a rascal .
I have some little concern in the business , as well as yourself , for Lucy Steele is my cousin , and I believe there is not a better kind of girl in the world , nor one who more deserves a good husband . ''
John Dashwood was greatly astonished ; but his nature was calm , not open to provocation , and he never wished to offend anybody , especially anybody of good fortune .
He therefore replied , without any resentment , '' I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours , madam .
Miss Lucy Steele is , I dare say , a very deserving young woman , but in the present case you know , the connection must be impossible .
And to have entered into a secret engagement with a young man under her uncle 's care , the son of a woman especially of such very large fortune as Mrs .
Ferrars , is perhaps , altogether a little extraordinary .
In short , I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any person whom you have a regard for , Mrs .
Jennings .
We all wish her extremely happy ; and Mrs .
Ferrars 's conduct throughout the whole , has been such as every conscientious , good mother , in like circumstances , would adopt .
It has been dignified and liberal .
Edward has drawn his own lot , and I fear it will be a bad one . ''
Marianne sighed out her similar apprehension ; and Elinor 's heart wrung for the feelings of Edward , while braving his mother 's threats , for a woman who could not reward him .
`` Well , sir , '' said Mrs .
Jennings , `` and how did it end ? ''
`` I am sorry to say , ma'am , in a most unhappy rupture : -- Edward is dismissed for ever from his mother 's notice .
He left her house yesterday , but where he is gone , or whether he is still in town , I do not know ; for WE of course can make no inquiry . ''
`` Poor young man ! -- and what is to become of him ? ''
`` What , indeed , ma'am !
It is a melancholy consideration .
Born to the prospect of such affluence !
I can not conceive a situation more deplorable .
The interest of two thousand pounds -- how can a man live on it ? -- and when to that is added the recollection , that he might , but for his own folly , within three months have been in the receipt of two thousand , five hundred a-year ( for Miss Morton has thirty thousand pounds , ) I can not picture to myself a more wretched condition .
We must all feel for him ; and the more so , because it is totally out of our power to assist him . ''
`` Poor young man ! ''
cried Mrs .
Jennings , `` I am sure he should be very welcome to bed and board at my house ; and so I would tell him if I could see him .
It is not fit that he should be living about at his own charge now , at lodgings and taverns . ''
Elinor 's heart thanked her for such kindness towards Edward , though she could not forbear smiling at the form of it .
`` If he would only have done as well by himself , '' said John Dashwood , `` as all his friends were disposed to do by him , he might now have been in his proper situation , and would have wanted for nothing .
But as it is , it must be out of anybody 's power to assist him .
And there is one thing more preparing against him , which must be worse than all -- his mother has determined , with a very natural kind of spirit , to settle THAT estate upon Robert immediately , which might have been Edward 's , on proper conditions .
I left her this morning with her lawyer , talking over the business . ''
`` Well ! ''
said Mrs .
Jennings , `` that is HER revenge .
Everybody has a way of their own .
But I do n't think mine would be , to make one son independent , because another had plagued me . ''
Marianne got up and walked about the room .
`` Can anything be more galling to the spirit of a man , '' continued John , `` than to see his younger brother in possession of an estate which might have been his own ?
Poor Edward !
I feel for him sincerely . ''
A few minutes more spent in the same kind of effusion , concluded his visit ; and with repeated assurances to his sisters that he really believed there was no material danger in Fanny 's indisposition , and that they need not therefore be very uneasy about it , he went away ; leaving the three ladies unanimous in their sentiments on the present occasion , as far at least as it regarded Mrs .
Ferrars 's conduct , the Dashwoods ' , and Edward 's .
Marianne 's indignation burst forth as soon as he quitted the room ; and as her vehemence made reserve impossible in Elinor , and unnecessary in Mrs .
Jennings , they all joined in a very spirited critique upon the party .
CHAPTER 38 Mrs .
Jennings was very warm in her praise of Edward's conduct , but only Elinor and Marianne understood its true merit .
THEY only knew how little he had had to tempt him to be disobedient , and how small was the consolation , beyond the consciousness of doing right , that could remain to him in the loss of friends and fortune .
Elinor gloried in his integrity ; and Marianne forgave all his offences in compassion for his punishment .
But though confidence between them was , by this public discovery , restored to its proper state , it was not a subject on which either of them were fond of dwelling when alone .
Elinor avoided it upon principle , as tending to fix still more upon her thoughts , by the too warm , too positive assurances of Marianne , that belief of Edward 's continued affection for herself which she rather wished to do away ; and Marianne 's courage soon failed her , in trying to converse upon a topic which always left her more dissatisfied with herself than ever , by the comparison it necessarily produced between Elinor 's conduct and her own .
She felt all the force of that comparison ; but not as her sister had hoped , to urge her to exertion now ; she felt it with all the pain of continual self-reproach , regretted most bitterly that she had never exerted herself before ; but it brought only the torture of penitence , without the hope of amendment .
Her mind was so much weakened that she still fancied present exertion impossible , and therefore it only dispirited her more .
Nothing new was heard by them , for a day or two afterwards , of affairs in Harley Street , or Bartlett 's Buildings .
But though so much of the matter was known to them already , that Mrs .
Jennings might have had enough to do in spreading that knowledge farther , without seeking after more , she had resolved from the first to pay a visit of comfort and inquiry to her cousins as soon as she could ; and nothing but the hindrance of more visitors than usual , had prevented her going to them within that time .
The third day succeeding their knowledge of the particulars , was so fine , so beautiful a Sunday as to draw many to Kensington Gardens , though it was only the second week in March .
Mrs .
Jennings and Elinor were of the number ; but Marianne , who knew that the Willoughbys were again in town , and had a constant dread of meeting them , chose rather to stay at home , than venture into so public a place .
An intimate acquaintance of Mrs .
Jennings joined them soon after they entered the Gardens , and Elinor was not sorry that by her continuing with them , and engaging all Mrs .
Jennings 's conversation , she was herself left to quiet reflection .
She saw nothing of the Willoughbys , nothing of Edward , and for some time nothing of anybody who could by any chance whether grave or gay , be interesting to her .
But at last she found herself with some surprise , accosted by Miss Steele , who , though looking rather shy , expressed great satisfaction in meeting them , and on receiving encouragement from the particular kindness of Mrs .
Jennings , left her own party for a short time , to join their 's .
Mrs .
Jennings immediately whispered to Elinor , '' Get it all out of her , my dear .
She will tell you any thing if you ask .
You see I can not leave Mrs .
Clarke . ''
It was lucky , however , for Mrs .
Jennings 's curiosity and Elinor 's too , that she would tell any thing WITHOUT being asked ; for nothing would otherwise have been learnt .
`` I am so glad to meet you ; '' said Miss Steele , taking her familiarly by the arm -- '' for I wanted to see you of all things in the world . ''
And then lowering her voice , '' I suppose Mrs .
Jennings has heard all about it .
Is she angry ? ''
`` Not at all , I believe , with you . ''
`` That is a good thing .
And Lady Middleton , is SHE angry ? ''
`` I can not suppose it possible that she should . ''
`` I am monstrous glad of it .
Good gracious !
I have had such a time of it !
I never saw Lucy in such a rage in my life .
She vowed at first she would never trim me up a new bonnet , nor do any thing else for me again , so long as she lived ; but now she is quite come to , and we are as good friends as ever .
Look , she made me this bow to my hat , and put in the feather last night .
There now , YOU are going to laugh at me too .
But why should not I wear pink ribbons ?
I do not care if it IS the Doctor 's favourite colour .
I am sure , for my part , I should never have known he DID like it better than any other colour , if he had not happened to say so .
My cousins have been so plaguing me !
I declare sometimes I do not know which way to look before them . ''
She had wandered away to a subject on which Elinor had nothing to say , and therefore soon judged it expedient to find her way back again to the first .
`` Well , but Miss Dashwood , '' speaking triumphantly , '' people may say what they chuse about Mr .
Ferrars's declaring he would not have Lucy , for it is no such thing I can tell you ; and it is quite a shame for such ill-natured reports to be spread abroad .
Whatever Lucy might think about it herself , you know , it was no business of other people to set it down for certain . ''
`` I never heard any thing of the kind hinted at before , I assure you , '' said Elinor .
`` Oh , did not you ?
But it WAS said , I know , very well , and by more than one ; for Miss Godby told Miss Sparks , that nobody in their senses could expect Mr .
Ferrars to give up a woman like Miss Morton , with thirty thousand pounds to her fortune , for Lucy Steele that had nothing at all ; and I had it from Miss Sparks myself .
And besides that , my cousin Richard said himself , that when it came to the point he was afraid Mr .
Ferrars would be off ; and when Edward did not come near us for three days , I could not tell what to think myself ; and I believe in my heart Lucy gave it up all for lost ; for we came away from your brother 's Wednesday , and we saw nothing of him not all Thursday , Friday , and Saturday , and did not know what was become of him .
Once Lucy thought to write to him , but then her spirits rose against that .
However this morning he came just as we came home from church ; and then it all came out , how he had been sent for Wednesday to Harley Street , and been talked to by his mother and all of them , and how he had declared before them all that he loved nobody but Lucy , and nobody but Lucy would he have .
And how he had been so worried by what passed , that as soon as he had went away from his mother 's house , he had got upon his horse , and rid into the country , some where or other ; and how he had stayed about at an inn all Thursday and Friday , on purpose to get the better of it .
And after thinking it all over and over again , he said , it seemed to him as if , now he had no fortune , and no nothing at all , it would be quite unkind to keep her on to the engagement , because it must be for her loss , for he had nothing but two thousand pounds , and no hope of any thing else ; and if he was to go into orders , as he had some thoughts , he could get nothing but a curacy , and how was they to live upon that ? -- He could not bear to think of her doing no better , and so he begged , if she had the least mind for it , to put an end to the matter directly , and leave him shift for himself .
I heard him say all this as plain as could possibly be .
And it was entirely for HER sake , and upon HER account , that he said a word about being off , and not upon his own .
I will take my oath he never dropt a syllable of being tired of her , or of wishing to marry Miss Morton , or any thing like it .
But , to be sure , Lucy would not give ear to such kind of talking ; so she told him directly ( with a great deal about sweet and love , you know , and all that -- Oh , la !
one ca n't repeat such kind of things you know ) -- she told him directly , she had not the least mind in the world to be off , for she could live with him upon a trifle , and how little so ever he might have , she should be very glad to have it all , you know , or something of the kind .
So then he was monstrous happy , and talked on some time about what they should do , and they agreed he should take orders directly , and they must wait to be married till he got a living .
And just then I could not hear any more , for my cousin called from below to tell me Mrs .
Richardson was come in her coach , and would take one of us to Kensington Gardens ; so I was forced to go into the room and interrupt them , to ask Lucy if she would like to go , but she did not care to leave Edward ; so I just run up stairs and put on a pair of silk stockings and came off with the Richardsons . ''
`` I do not understand what you mean by interrupting them , '' said Elinor ; `` you were all in the same room together , were not you ? ''
`` No , indeed , not us .
La !
Miss Dashwood , do you think people make love when any body else is by ?
Oh , for shame ! -- To be sure you must know better than that .
( Laughing affectedly . )
-- No , no ; they were shut up in the drawing-room together , and all I heard was only by listening at the door . ''
`` How ! ''
cried Elinor ; `` have you been repeating to me what you only learnt yourself by listening at the door ?
I am sorry I did not know it before ; for I certainly would not have suffered you to give me particulars of a conversation which you ought not to have known yourself .
How could you behave so unfairly by your sister ? ''
`` Oh , la !
there is nothing in THAT .
I only stood at the door , and heard what I could .
And I am sure Lucy would have done just the same by me ; for a year or two back , when Martha Sharpe and I had so many secrets together , she never made any bones of hiding in a closet , or behind a chimney-board , on purpose to hear what we said . ''
Elinor tried to talk of something else ; but Miss Steele could not be kept beyond a couple of minutes , from what was uppermost in her mind .
`` Edward talks of going to Oxford soon , '' said she ; '' but now he is lodging at No .
-- , Pall Mall .
What an ill-natured woman his mother is , a n't she ?
And your brother and sister were not very kind !
However , I sha n't say anything against them to YOU ; and to be sure they did send us home in their own chariot , which was more than I looked for .
And for my part , I was all in a fright for fear your sister should ask us for the huswifes she had gave us a day or two before ; but , however , nothing was said about them , and I took care to keep mine out of sight .
Edward have got some business at Oxford , he says ; so he must go there for a time ; and after THAT , as soon as he can light upon a Bishop , he will be ordained .
I wonder what curacy he will get ! -- Good gracious !
( giggling as she spoke ) I 'd lay my life I know what my cousins will say , when they hear of it .
They will tell me I should write to the Doctor , to get Edward the curacy of his new living .
I know they will ; but I am sure I would not do such a thing for all the world. -- 'La ! '
I shall say directly , ' I wonder how you could think of such a thing ?
I write to the Doctor , indeed ! ' ''
`` Well , '' said Elinor , `` it is a comfort to be prepared against the worst .
You have got your answer ready . ''
Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject , but the approach of her own party made another more necessary .
`` Oh , la !
here come the Richardsons .
I had a vast deal more to say to you , but I must not stay away from them not any longer .
I assure you they are very genteel people .
He makes a monstrous deal of money , and they keep their own coach .
I have not time to speak to Mrs .
Jennings about it myself , but pray tell her I am quite happy to hear she is not in anger against us , and Lady Middleton the same ; and if anything should happen to take you and your sister away , and Mrs .
Jennings should want company , I am sure we should be very glad to come and stay with her for as long a time as she likes .
I suppose Lady Middleton wo n't ask us any more this bout .
Good-by ; I am sorry Miss Marianne was not here .
Remember me kindly to her .
La !
if you have not got your spotted muslin on ! -- I wonder you was not afraid of its being torn . ''
Such was her parting concern ; for after this , she had time only to pay her farewell compliments to Mrs .
Jennings , before her company was claimed by Mrs .
Richardson ; and Elinor was left in possession of knowledge which might feed her powers of reflection some time , though she had learnt very little more than what had been already foreseen and foreplanned in her own mind .
Edward 's marriage with Lucy was as firmly determined on , and the time of its taking place remained as absolutely uncertain , as she had concluded it would be ; -- every thing depended , exactly after her expectation , on his getting that preferment , of which , at present , there seemed not the smallest chance .
As soon as they returned to the carriage , Mrs .
Jennings was eager for information ; but as Elinor wished to spread as little as possible intelligence that had in the first place been so unfairly obtained , she confined herself to the brief repetition of such simple particulars , as she felt assured that Lucy , for the sake of her own consequence , would choose to have known .
The continuance of their engagement , and the means that were able to be taken for promoting its end , was all her communication ; and this produced from Mrs .
Jennings the following natural remark .
`` Wait for his having a living ! -- ay , we all know how THAT will end : -- they will wait a twelvemonth , and finding no good comes of it , will set down upon a curacy of fifty pounds a-year , with the interest of his two thousand pounds , and what little matter Mr .
Steele and Mr .
Pratt can give her. -- Then they will have a child every year !
and Lord help 'em !
how poor they will be ! -- I must see what I can give them towards furnishing their house .
Two maids and two men , indeed ! -- as I talked of t'other day. -- No , no , they must get a stout girl of all works. -- Betty 's sister would never do for them NOW . ''
The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the two-penny post from Lucy herself .
It was as follows : `` Bartlett 's Building , March .
`` I hope my dear Miss Dashwood will excuse the liberty I take of writing to her ; but I know your friendship for me will make you pleased to hear such a good account of myself and my dear Edward , after all the troubles we have went through lately , therefore will make no more apologies , but proceed to say that , thank God !
though we have suffered dreadfully , we are both quite well now , and as happy as we must always be in one another 's love .
We have had great trials , and great persecutions , but however , at the same time , gratefully acknowledge many friends , yourself not the least among them , whose great kindness I shall always thankfully remember , as will Edward too , who I have told of it .
I am sure you will be glad to hear , as likewise dear Mrs .
Jennings , I spent two happy hours with him yesterday afternoon , he would not hear of our parting , though earnestly did I , as I thought my duty required , urge him to it for prudence sake , and would have parted for ever on the spot , would he consent to it ; but he said it should never be , he did not regard his mother 's anger , while he could have my affections ; our prospects are not very bright , to be sure , but we must wait , and hope for the best ; he will be ordained shortly ; and should it ever be in your power to recommend him to any body that has a living to bestow , am very sure you will not forget us , and dear Mrs .
Jennings too , trust she will speak a good word for us to Sir John , or Mr .
Palmer , or any friend that may be able to assist us. -- Poor Anne was much to blame for what she did , but she did it for the best , so I say nothing ; hope Mrs .
Jennings wo n't think it too much trouble to give us a call , should she come this way any morning , 'twould be a great kindness , and my cousins would be proud to know her. -- My paper reminds me to conclude ; and begging to be most gratefully and respectfully remembered to her , and to Sir John , and Lady Middleton , and the dear children , when you chance to see them , and love to Miss Marianne , `` I am , & c . ''
As soon as Elinor had finished it , she performed what she concluded to be its writer 's real design , by placing it in the hands of Mrs .
Jennings , who read it aloud with many comments of satisfaction and praise .
`` Very well indeed ! -- how prettily she writes ! -- aye , that was quite proper to let him be off if he would .
That was just like Lucy. -- Poor soul !
I wish I COULD get him a living , with all my heart. -- She calls me dear Mrs .
Jennings , you see .
She is a good-hearted girl as ever lived. -- Very well upon my word .
That sentence is very prettily turned .
Yes , yes , I will go and see her , sure enough .
How attentive she is , to think of every body ! -- Thank you , my dear , for shewing it me .
It is as pretty a letter as ever I saw , and does Lucy 's head and heart great credit . ''
CHAPTER 39 The Miss Dashwoods had now been rather more than two months in town , and Marianne 's impatience to be gone increased every day .
She sighed for the air , the liberty , the quiet of the country ; and fancied that if any place could give her ease , Barton must do it .
Elinor was hardly less anxious than herself for their removal , and only so much less bent on its being effected immediately , as that she was conscious of the difficulties of so long a journey , which Marianne could not be brought to acknowledge .
She began , however , seriously to turn her thoughts towards its accomplishment , and had already mentioned their wishes to their kind hostess , who resisted them with all the eloquence of her good-will , when a plan was suggested , which , though detaining them from home yet a few weeks longer , appeared to Elinor altogether much more eligible than any other .
The Palmers were to remove to Cleveland about the end of March , for the Easter holidays ; and Mrs .
Jennings , with both her friends , received a very warm invitation from Charlotte to go with them .
This would not , in itself , have been sufficient for the delicacy of Miss Dashwood ; -- but it was inforced with so much real politeness by Mr .
Palmer himself , as , joined to the very great amendment of his manners towards them since her sister had been known to be unhappy , induced her to accept it with pleasure .
When she told Marianne what she had done , however , her first reply was not very auspicious .
`` Cleveland ! ''
-- she cried , with great agitation .
`` No , I can not go to Cleveland . ''
-- '' You forget , '' said Elinor gently , `` that its situation is not ... that it is not in the neighbourhood of ... '' '' But it is in Somersetshire. -- I can not go into Somersetshire. -- There , where I looked forward to going ... No , Elinor , you can not expect me to go there . ''
Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of overcoming such feelings ; -- she only endeavoured to counteract them by working on others ; -- represented it , therefore , as a measure which would fix the time of her returning to that dear mother , whom she so much wished to see , in a more eligible , more comfortable manner , than any other plan could do , and perhaps without any greater delay .
From Cleveland , which was within a few miles of Bristol , the distance to Barton was not beyond one day , though a long day 's journey ; and their mother 's servant might easily come there to attend them down ; and as there could be no occasion of their staying above a week at Cleveland , they might now be at home in little more than three weeks ' time .
As Marianne's affection for her mother was sincere , it must triumph with little difficulty , over the imaginary evils she had started .
Mrs .
Jennings was so far from being weary of her guest , that she pressed them very earnestly to return with her again from Cleveland .
Elinor was grateful for the attention , but it could not alter her design ; and their mother's concurrence being readily gained , every thing relative to their return was arranged as far as it could be ; -- and Marianne found some relief in drawing up a statement of the hours that were yet to divide her from Barton .
`` Ah !
Colonel , I do not know what you and I shall do without the Miss Dashwoods ; '' -- was Mrs .
Jennings's address to him when he first called on her , after their leaving her was settled -- '' for they are quite resolved upon going home from the Palmers ; -- and how forlorn we shall be , when I come back ! -- Lord !
we shall sit and gape at one another as dull as two cats . ''
Perhaps Mrs .
Jennings was in hopes , by this vigorous sketch of their future ennui , to provoke him to make that offer , which might give himself an escape from it ; -- and if so , she had soon afterwards good reason to think her object gained ; for , on Elinor 's moving to the window to take more expeditiously the dimensions of a print , which she was going to copy for her friend , he followed her to it with a look of particular meaning , and conversed with her there for several minutes .
The effect of his discourse on the lady too , could not escape her observation , for though she was too honorable to listen , and had even changed her seat , on purpose that she might NOT hear , to one close by the piano forte on which Marianne was playing , she could not keep herself from seeing that Elinor changed colour , attended with agitation , and was too intent on what he said to pursue her employment. -- Still farther in confirmation of her hopes , in the interval of Marianne 's turning from one lesson to another , some words of the Colonel 's inevitably reached her ear , in which he seemed to be apologising for the badness of his house .
This set the matter beyond a doubt .
She wondered , indeed , at his thinking it necessary to do so ; but supposed it to be the proper etiquette .
What Elinor said in reply she could not distinguish , but judged from the motion of her lips , that she did not think THAT any material objection ; -- and Mrs .
Jennings commended her in her heart for being so honest .
They then talked on for a few minutes longer without her catching a syllable , when another lucky stop in Marianne's performance brought her these words in the Colonel 's calm voice , -- '' I am afraid it can not take place very soon . ''
Astonished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech , she was almost ready to cry out , `` Lord !
what should hinder it ? ''
-- but checking her desire , confined herself to this silent ejaculation .
`` This is very strange ! -- sure he need not wait to be older . ''
This delay on the Colonel 's side , however , did not seem to offend or mortify his fair companion in the least , for on their breaking up the conference soon afterwards , and moving different ways , Mrs .
Jennings very plainly heard Elinor say , and with a voice which shewed her to feel what she said , '' I shall always think myself very much obliged to you . ''
Mrs .
Jennings was delighted with her gratitude , and only wondered that after hearing such a sentence , the Colonel should be able to take leave of them , as he immediately did , with the utmost sang-froid , and go away without making her any reply ! -- She had not thought her old friend could have made so indifferent a suitor .
What had really passed between them was to this effect .
`` I have heard , '' said he , with great compassion , '' of the injustice your friend Mr .
Ferrars has suffered from his family ; for if I understand the matter right , he has been entirely cast off by them for persevering in his engagement with a very deserving young woman. -- Have I been rightly informed ? -- Is it so ? -- '' Elinor told him that it was .
`` The cruelty , the impolitic cruelty , '' -- he replied , with great feeling , -- '' of dividing , or attempting to divide , two young people long attached to each other , is terrible. -- Mrs .
Ferrars does not know what she may be doing -- what she may drive her son to .
I have seen Mr .
Ferrars two or three times in Harley Street , and am much pleased with him .
He is not a young man with whom one can be intimately acquainted in a short time , but I have seen enough of him to wish him well for his own sake , and as a friend of yours , I wish it still more .
I understand that he intends to take orders .
Will you be so good as to tell him that the living of Delaford , now just vacant , as I am informed by this day 's post , is his , if he think it worth his acceptance -- but THAT , perhaps , so unfortunately circumstanced as he is now , it may be nonsense to appear to doubt ; I only wish it were more valuable. -- It is a rectory , but a small one ; the late incumbent , I believe , did not make more than 200 L per annum , and though it is certainly capable of improvement , I fear , not to such an amount as to afford him a very comfortable income .
Such as it is , however , my pleasure in presenting him to it , will be very great .
Pray assure him of it . ''
Elinor 's astonishment at this commission could hardly have been greater , had the Colonel been really making her an offer of his hand .
The preferment , which only two days before she had considered as hopeless for Edward , was already provided to enable him to marry ; -- and SHE , of all people in the world , was fixed on to bestow it ! -- Her emotion was such as Mrs .
Jennings had attributed to a very different cause ; -- but whatever minor feelings less pure , less pleasing , might have a share in that emotion , her esteem for the general benevolence , and her gratitude for the particular friendship , which together prompted Colonel Brandon to this act , were strongly felt , and warmly expressed .
She thanked him for it with all her heart , spoke of Edward 's principles and disposition with that praise which she knew them to deserve ; and promised to undertake the commission with pleasure , if it were really his wish to put off so agreeable an office to another .
But at the same time , she could not help thinking that no one could so well perform it as himself .
It was an office in short , from which , unwilling to give Edward the pain of receiving an obligation from HER , she would have been very glad to be spared herself ; -- but Colonel Brandon , on motives of equal delicacy , declining it likewise , still seemed so desirous of its being given through her means , that she would not on any account make farther opposition .
Edward , she believed , was still in town , and fortunately she had heard his address from Miss Steele .
She could undertake therefore to inform him of it , in the course of the day .
After this had been settled , Colonel Brandon began to talk of his own advantage in securing so respectable and agreeable a neighbour , and THEN it was that he mentioned with regret , that the house was small and indifferent ; -- an evil which Elinor , as Mrs .
Jennings had supposed her to do , made very light of , at least as far as regarded its size .
`` The smallness of the house , '' said she , '' I can not imagine any inconvenience to them , for it will be in proportion to their family and income . ''
By which the Colonel was surprised to find that SHE was considering Mr .
Ferrars 's marriage as the certain consequence of the presentation ; for he did not suppose it possible that Delaford living could supply such an income , as anybody in his style of life would venture to settle on -- and he said so .
`` This little rectory CAN do no more than make Mr .
Ferrars comfortable as a bachelor ; it can not enable him to marry .
I am sorry to say that my patronage ends with this ; and my interest is hardly more extensive .
If , however , by an unforeseen chance it should be in my power to serve him farther , I must think very differently of him from what I now do , if I am not as ready to be useful to him then as I sincerely wish I could be at present .
What I am now doing indeed , seems nothing at all , since it can advance him so little towards what must be his principal , his only object of happiness .
His marriage must still be a distant good ; -- at least , I am afraid it can not take place very soon. -- '' Such was the sentence which , when misunderstood , so justly offended the delicate feelings of Mrs .
Jennings ; but after this narration of what really passed between Colonel Brandon and Elinor , while they stood at the window , the gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting , may perhaps appear in general , not less reasonably excited , nor less properly worded than if it had arisen from an offer of marriage .
CHAPTER 40 '' Well , Miss Dashwood , '' said Mrs .
Jennings , sagaciously smiling , as soon as the gentleman had withdrawn , '' I do not ask you what the Colonel has been saying to you ; for though , upon my honour , I TRIED to keep out of hearing , I could not help catching enough to understand his business .
And I assure you I never was better pleased in my life , and I wish you joy of it with all my heart . ''
`` Thank you , ma'am , '' said Elinor .
`` It is a matter of great joy to me ; and I feel the goodness of Colonel Brandon most sensibly .
There are not many men who would act as he has done .
Few people who have so compassionate a heart !
I never was more astonished in my life . ''
`` Lord !
my dear , you are very modest .
I a n't the least astonished at it in the world , for I have often thought of late , there was nothing more likely to happen . ''
`` You judged from your knowledge of the Colonel's general benevolence ; but at least you could not foresee that the opportunity would so very soon occur . ''
`` Opportunity ! ''
repeated Mrs .
Jennings -- '' Oh !
as to that , when a man has once made up his mind to such a thing , somehow or other he will soon find an opportunity .
Well , my dear , I wish you joy of it again and again ; and if ever there was a happy couple in the world , I think I shall soon know where to look for them . ''
`` You mean to go to Delaford after them I suppose , '' said Elinor , with a faint smile .
`` Aye , my dear , that I do , indeed .
And as to the house being a bad one , I do not know what the Colonel would be at , for it is as good a one as ever I saw . ''
`` He spoke of its being out of repair . ''
`` Well , and whose fault is that ?
why do n't he repair it ? -- who should do it but himself ? ''
They were interrupted by the servant 's coming in to announce the carriage being at the door ; and Mrs .
Jennings immediately preparing to go , said , -- '' Well , my dear , I must be gone before I have had half my talk out .
But , however , we may have it all over in the evening ; for we shall be quite alone .
I do not ask you to go with me , for I dare say your mind is too full of the matter to care for company ; and besides , you must long to tell your sister all about it . ''
Marianne had left the room before the conversation began .
`` Certainly , ma'am , I shall tell Marianne of it ; but I shall not mention it at present to any body else . ''
`` Oh !
very well , '' said Mrs .
Jennings rather disappointed .
`` Then you would not have me tell it to Lucy , for I think of going as far as Holborn to-day . ''
`` No , ma'am , not even Lucy if you please .
One day 's delay will not be very material ; and till I have written to Mr .
Ferrars , I think it ought not to be mentioned to any body else .
I shall do THAT directly .
It is of importance that no time should be lost with him , for he will of course have much to do relative to his ordination . ''
This speech at first puzzled Mrs .
Jennings exceedingly .
Why Mr .
Ferrars was to have been written to about it in such a hurry , she could not immediately comprehend .
A few moments ' reflection , however , produced a very happy idea , and she exclaimed ; -- '' Oh , ho ! -- I understand you .
Mr .
Ferrars is to be the man .
Well , so much the better for him .
Ay , to be sure , he must be ordained in readiness ; and I am very glad to find things are so forward between you .
But , my dear , is not this rather out of character ?
Should not the Colonel write himself ? -- sure , he is the proper person . ''
Elinor did not quite understand the beginning of Mrs .
Jennings 's speech , neither did she think it worth inquiring into ; and therefore only replied to its conclusion .
`` Colonel Brandon is so delicate a man , that he rather wished any one to announce his intentions to Mr .
Ferrars than himself . ''
`` And so YOU are forced to do it .
Well THAT is an odd kind of delicacy !
However , I will not disturb you ( seeing her preparing to write . )
You know your own concerns best .
So goodby , my dear .
I have not heard of any thing to please me so well since Charlotte was brought to bed . ''
And away she went ; but returning again in a moment , '' I have just been thinking of Betty 's sister , my dear .
I should be very glad to get her so good a mistress .
But whether she would do for a lady 's maid , I am sure I ca n't tell .
She is an excellent housemaid , and works very well at her needle .
However , you will think of all that at your leisure . ''
`` Certainly , ma'am , '' replied Elinor , not hearing much of what she said , and more anxious to be alone , than to be mistress of the subject .
How she should begin -- how she should express herself in her note to Edward , was now all her concern .
The particular circumstances between them made a difficulty of that which to any other person would have been the easiest thing in the world ; but she equally feared to say too much or too little , and sat deliberating over her paper , with the pen in her band , till broken in on by the entrance of Edward himself .
He had met Mrs .
Jennings at the door in her way to the carriage , as he came to leave his farewell card ; and she , after apologising for not returning herself , had obliged him to enter , by saying that Miss Dashwood was above , and wanted to speak with him on very particular business .
Elinor had just been congratulating herself , in the midst of her perplexity , that however difficult it might be to express herself properly by letter , it was at least preferable to giving the information by word of mouth , when her visitor entered , to force her upon this greatest exertion of all .
Her astonishment and confusion were very great on his so sudden appearance .
She had not seen him before since his engagement became public , and therefore not since his knowing her to be acquainted with it ; which , with the consciousness of what she had been thinking of , and what she had to tell him , made her feel particularly uncomfortable for some minutes .
He too was much distressed ; and they sat down together in a most promising state of embarrassment. -- Whether he had asked her pardon for his intrusion on first coming into the room , he could not recollect ; but determining to be on the safe side , he made his apology in form as soon as he could say any thing , after taking a chair .
`` Mrs .
Jennings told me , '' said he , `` that you wished to speak with me , at least I understood her so -- or I certainly should not have intruded on you in such a manner ; though at the same time , I should have been extremely sorry to leave London without seeing you and your sister ; especially as it will most likely be some time -- it is not probable that I should soon have the pleasure of meeting you again .
I go to Oxford tomorrow . ''
`` You would not have gone , however , '' said Elinor , recovering herself , and determined to get over what she so much dreaded as soon as possible , `` without receiving our good wishes , even if we had not been able to give them in person .
Mrs .
Jennings was quite right in what she said .
I have something of consequence to inform you of , which I was on the point of communicating by paper .
I am charged with a most agreeable office ( breathing rather faster than usual as she spoke . )
Colonel Brandon , who was here only ten minutes ago , has desired me to say , that understanding you mean to take orders , he has great pleasure in offering you the living of Delaford now just vacant , and only wishes it were more valuable .
Allow me to congratulate you on having so respectable and well-judging a friend , and to join in his wish that the living -- it is about two hundred a-year -- were much more considerable , and such as might better enable you to -- as might be more than a temporary accommodation to yourself -- such , in short , as might establish all your views of happiness . ''
What Edward felt , as he could not say it himself , it can not be expected that any one else should say for him .
He LOOKED all the astonishment which such unexpected , such unthought-of information could not fail of exciting ; but he said only these two words , '' Colonel Brandon ! ''
`` Yes , '' continued Elinor , gathering more resolution , as some of the worst was over , `` Colonel Brandon means it as a testimony of his concern for what has lately passed -- for the cruel situation in which the unjustifiable conduct of your family has placed you -- a concern which I am sure Marianne , myself , and all your friends , must share ; and likewise as a proof of his high esteem for your general character , and his particular approbation of your behaviour on the present occasion . ''
`` Colonel Brandon give ME a living ! -- Can it be possible ? ''
`` The unkindness of your own relations has made you astonished to find friendship any where . ''
`` No , '' replied be , with sudden consciousness , `` not to find it in YOU ; for I can not be ignorant that to you , to your goodness , I owe it all. -- I feel it -- I would express it if I could -- but , as you well know , I am no orator . ''
`` You are very much mistaken .
I do assure you that you owe it entirely , at least almost entirely , to your own merit , and Colonel Brandon 's discernment of it .
I have had no hand in it .
I did not even know , till I understood his design , that the living was vacant ; nor had it ever occurred to me that he might have had such a living in his gift .
As a friend of mine , of my family , he may , perhaps -- indeed I know he HAS , still greater pleasure in bestowing it ; but , upon my word , you owe nothing to my solicitation . ''
Truth obliged her to acknowledge some small share in the action , but she was at the same time so unwilling to appear as the benefactress of Edward , that she acknowledged it with hesitation ; which probably contributed to fix that suspicion in his mind which had recently entered it .
For a short time he sat deep in thought , after Elinor had ceased to speak ; -- at last , and as if it were rather an effort , he said , '' Colonel Brandon seems a man of great worth and respectability .
I have always heard him spoken of as such , and your brother I know esteems him highly .
He is undoubtedly a sensible man , and in his manners perfectly the gentleman . ''
`` Indeed , '' replied Elinor , `` I believe that you will find him , on farther acquaintance , all that you have heard him to be , and as you will be such very near neighbours ( for I understand the parsonage is almost close to the mansion-house , ) it is particularly important that he SHOULD be all this . ''
Edward made no answer ; but when she had turned away her head , gave her a look so serious , so earnest , so uncheerful , as seemed to say , that he might hereafter wish the distance between the parsonage and the mansion-house much greater .
`` Colonel Brandon , I think , lodges in St .
James Street , '' said he , soon afterwards , rising from his chair .
Elinor told him the number of the house .
`` I must hurry away then , to give him those thanks which you will not allow me to give YOU ; to assure him that he has made me a very -- an exceedingly happy man . ''
Elinor did not offer to detain him ; and they parted , with a very earnest assurance on HER side of her unceasing good wishes for his happiness in every change of situation that might befall him ; on HIS , with rather an attempt to return the same good will , than the power of expressing it .
`` When I see him again , '' said Elinor to herself , as the door shut him out , `` I shall see him the husband of Lucy . ''
And with this pleasing anticipation , she sat down to reconsider the past , recall the words and endeavour to comprehend all the feelings of Edward ; and , of course , to reflect on her own with discontent .
When Mrs .
Jennings came home , though she returned from seeing people whom she had never seen before , and of whom therefore she must have a great deal to say , her mind was so much more occupied by the important secret in her possession , than by anything else , that she reverted to it again as soon as Elinor appeared .
`` Well , my dear , '' she cried , `` I sent you up to the young man .
Did not I do right ? -- And I suppose you had no great difficulty -- You did not find him very unwilling to accept your proposal ? ''
`` No , ma'am ; THAT was not very likely . ''
`` Well , and how soon will he be ready ? -- For it seems all to depend upon that . ''
`` Really , '' said Elinor , `` I know so little of these kind of forms , that I can hardly even conjecture as to the time , or the preparation necessary ; but I suppose two or three months will complete his ordination . ''
`` Two or three months ! ''
cried Mrs .
Jennings ; `` Lord !
my dear , how calmly you talk of it ; and can the Colonel wait two or three months !
Lord bless me ! -- I am sure it would put ME quite out of patience ! -- And though one would be very glad to do a kindness by poor Mr .
Ferrars , I do think it is not worth while to wait two or three months for him .
Sure somebody else might be found that would do as well ; somebody that is in orders already . ''
`` My dear ma'am , '' said Elinor , `` what can you be thinking of ? -- Why , Colonel Brandon 's only object is to be of use to Mr .
Ferrars . ''
`` Lord bless you , my dear ! -- Sure you do not mean to persuade me that the Colonel only marries you for the sake of giving ten guineas to Mr .
Ferrars ! ''
The deception could not continue after this ; and an explanation immediately took place , by which both gained considerable amusement for the moment , without any material loss of happiness to either , for Mrs .
Jennings only exchanged one form of delight for another , and still without forfeiting her expectation of the first .
`` Aye , aye , the parsonage is but a small one , '' said she , after the first ebullition of surprise and satisfaction was over , `` and very likely MAY be out of repair ; but to hear a man apologising , as I thought , for a house that to my knowledge has five sitting rooms on the ground-floor , and I think the housekeeper told me could make up fifteen beds ! -- and to you too , that had been used to live in Barton cottage ! -- It seems quite ridiculous .
But , my dear , we must touch up the Colonel to do some thing to the parsonage , and make it comfortable for them , before Lucy goes to it . ''
`` But Colonel Brandon does not seem to have any idea of the living 's being enough to allow them to marry . ''
`` The Colonel is a ninny , my dear ; because he has two thousand a-year himself , he thinks that nobody else can marry on less .
Take my word for it , that , if I am alive , I shall be paying a visit at Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas ; and I am sure I sha'nt go if Lucy a n't there . ''
Elinor was quite of her opinion , as to the probability of their not waiting for any thing more .
CHAPTER 41 Edward , having carried his thanks to Colonel Brandon , proceeded with his happiness to Lucy ; and such was the excess of it by the time he reached Bartlett 's Buildings , that she was able to assure Mrs .
Jennings , who called on her again the next day with her congratulations , that she had never seen him in such spirits before in her life .
Her own happiness , and her own spirits , were at least very certain ; and she joined Mrs .
Jennings most heartily in her expectation of their being all comfortably together in Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas .
So far was she , at the same time , from any backwardness to give Elinor that credit which Edward WOULD give her , that she spoke of her friendship for them both with the most grateful warmth , was ready to own all their obligation to her , and openly declared that no exertion for their good on Miss Dashwood 's part , either present or future , would ever surprise her , for she believed her capable of doing any thing in the world for those she really valued .
As for Colonel Brandon , she was not only ready to worship him as a saint , but was moreover truly anxious that he should be treated as one in all worldly concerns ; anxious that his tithes should be raised to the utmost ; and scarcely resolved to avail herself , at Delaford , as far as she possibly could , of his servants , his carriage , his cows , and his poultry .
It was now above a week since John Dashwood had called in Berkeley Street , and as since that time no notice had been taken by them of his wife 's indisposition , beyond one verbal enquiry , Elinor began to feel it necessary to pay her a visit. -- This was an obligation , however , which not only opposed her own inclination , but which had not the assistance of any encouragement from her companions .
Marianne , not contented with absolutely refusing to go herself , was very urgent to prevent her sister 's going at all ; and Mrs .
Jennings , though her carriage was always at Elinor 's service , so very much disliked Mrs .
John Dashwood , that not even her curiosity to see how she looked after the late discovery , nor her strong desire to affront her by taking Edward 's part , could overcome her unwillingness to be in her company again .
The consequence was , that Elinor set out by herself to pay a visit , for which no one could really have less inclination , and to run the risk of a tete-a-tete with a woman , whom neither of the others had so much reason to dislike .
Mrs .
Dashwood was denied ; but before the carriage could turn from the house , her husband accidentally came out .
He expressed great pleasure in meeting Elinor , told her that he had been just going to call in Berkeley Street , and , assuring her that Fanny would be very glad to see her , invited her to come in .
They walked up stairs in to the drawing-room. -- Nobody was there .
`` Fanny is in her own room , I suppose , '' said he : -- '' I will go to her presently , for I am sure she will not have the least objection in the world to seeing YOU. -- Very far from it , indeed .
NOW especially there can not be -- but however , you and Marianne were always great favourites. -- Why would not Marianne come ? ''
-- Elinor made what excuse she could for her .
`` I am not sorry to see you alone , '' he replied , '' for I have a good deal to say to you .
This living of Colonel Brandon 's -- can it be true ? -- has he really given it to Edward ? -- I heard it yesterday by chance , and was coming to you on purpose to enquire farther about it . ''
`` It is perfectly true. -- Colonel Brandon has given the living of Delaford to Edward . ''
`` Really ! -- Well , this is very astonishing ! -- no relationship ! -- no connection between them ! -- and now that livings fetch such a price ! -- what was the value of this ? ''
`` About two hundred a year . ''
`` Very well -- and for the next presentation to a living of that value -- supposing the late incumbent to have been old and sickly , and likely to vacate it soon -- he might have got I dare say -- fourteen hundred pounds .
And how came he not to have settled that matter before this person 's death ? -- NOW indeed it would be too late to sell it , but a man of Colonel Brandon 's sense ! -- I wonder he should be so improvident in a point of such common , such natural , concern ! -- Well , I am convinced that there is a vast deal of inconsistency in almost every human character .
I suppose , however -- on recollection -- that the case may probably be THIS .
Edward is only to hold the living till the person to whom the Colonel has really sold the presentation , is old enough to take it. -- Aye , aye , that is the fact , depend upon it . ''
Elinor contradicted it , however , very positively ; and by relating that she had herself been employed in conveying the offer from Colonel Brandon to Edward , and , therefore , must understand the terms on which it was given , obliged him to submit to her authority .
`` It is truly astonishing ! ''
-- he cried , after hearing what she said -- '' what could be the Colonel 's motive ? ''
`` A very simple one -- to be of use to Mr .
Ferrars . ''
`` Well , well ; whatever Colonel Brandon may be , Edward is a very lucky man. -- You will not mention the matter to Fanny , however , for though I have broke it to her , and she bears it vastly well , -- she will not like to hear it much talked of . ''
Elinor had some difficulty here to refrain from observing , that she thought Fanny might have borne with composure , an acquisition of wealth to her brother , by which neither she nor her child could be possibly impoverished .
`` Mrs .
Ferrars , '' added he , lowering his voice to the tone becoming so important a subject , `` knows nothing about it at present , and I believe it will be best to keep it entirely concealed from her as long as may be. -- When the marriage takes place , I fear she must hear of it all . ''
`` But why should such precaution be used ? -- Though it is not to be supposed that Mrs .
Ferrars can have the smallest satisfaction in knowing that her son has money enough to live upon , -- for THAT must be quite out of the question ; yet why , upon her late behaviour , is she supposed to feel at all ? -- She has done with her son , she cast him off for ever , and has made all those over whom she had any influence , cast him off likewise .
Surely , after doing so , she can not be imagined liable to any impression of sorrow or of joy on his account -- she can not be interested in any thing that befalls him. -- She would not be so weak as to throw away the comfort of a child , and yet retain the anxiety of a parent ! ''
`` Ah !
Elinor , '' said John , `` your reasoning is very good , but it is founded on ignorance of human nature .
When Edward 's unhappy match takes place , depend upon it his mother will feel as much as if she had never discarded him ; and , therefore every circumstance that may accelerate that dreadful event , must be concealed from her as much as possible .
Mrs .
Ferrars can never forget that Edward is her son . ''
`` You surprise me ; I should think it must nearly have escaped her memory by THIS time . ''
`` You wrong her exceedingly .
Mrs .
Ferrars is one of the most affectionate mothers in the world . ''
Elinor was silent .
`` We think NOW , '' -- said Mr .
Dashwood , after a short pause , '' of ROBERT 'S marrying Miss Morton . ''
Elinor , smiling at the grave and decisive importance of her brother 's tone , calmly replied , '' The lady , I suppose , has no choice in the affair . ''
`` Choice ! -- how do you mean ? ''
`` I only mean that I suppose , from your manner of speaking , it must be the same to Miss Morton whether she marry Edward or Robert . ''
`` Certainly , there can be no difference ; for Robert will now to all intents and purposes be considered as the eldest son ; -- and as to any thing else , they are both very agreeable young men : I do not know that one is superior to the other . ''
Elinor said no more , and John was also for a short time silent. -- His reflections ended thus .
`` Of ONE thing , my dear sister , '' kindly taking her hand , and speaking in an awful whisper , -- '' I may assure you ; -- and I WILL do it , because I know it must gratify you .
I have good reason to think -- indeed I have it from the best authority , or I should not repeat it , for otherwise it would be very wrong to say any thing about it -- but I have it from the very best authority -- not that I ever precisely heard Mrs .
Ferrars say it herself -- but her daughter DID , and I have it from her -- That in short , whatever objections there might be against a certain -- a certain connection -- you understand me -- it would have been far preferable to her , it would not have given her half the vexation that THIS does .
I was exceedingly pleased to hear that Mrs .
Ferrars considered it in that light -- a very gratifying circumstance you know to us all .
'It would have been beyond comparison , ' she said , 'the least evil of the two , and she would be glad to compound NOW for nothing worse . '
But however , all that is quite out of the question -- not to be thought of or mentioned -- as to any attachment you know -- it never could be -- all that is gone by .
But I thought I would just tell you of this , because I knew how much it must please you .
Not that you have any reason to regret , my dear Elinor .
There is no doubt of your doing exceedingly well -- quite as well , or better , perhaps , all things considered .
Has Colonel Brandon been with you lately ? ''
Elinor had heard enough , if not to gratify her vanity , and raise her self-importance , to agitate her nerves and fill her mind ; -- and she was therefore glad to be spared from the necessity of saying much in reply herself , and from the danger of hearing any thing more from her brother , by the entrance of Mr .
Robert Ferrars .
After a few moments ' chat , John Dashwood , recollecting that Fanny was yet uninformed of her sister 's being there , quitted the room in quest of her ; and Elinor was left to improve her acquaintance with Robert , who , by the gay unconcern , the happy self-complacency of his manner while enjoying so unfair a division of his mother 's love and liberality , to the prejudice of his banished brother , earned only by his own dissipated course of life , and that brother 's integrity , was confirming her most unfavourable opinion of his head and heart .
They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves , before he began to speak of Edward ; for he , too , had heard of the living , and was very inquisitive on the subject .
Elinor repeated the particulars of it , as she had given them to John ; and their effect on Robert , though very different , was not less striking than it had been on HIM .
He laughed most immoderately .
The idea of Edward 's being a clergyman , and living in a small parsonage-house , diverted him beyond measure ; -- and when to that was added the fanciful imagery of Edward reading prayers in a white surplice , and publishing the banns of marriage between John Smith and Mary Brown , he could conceive nothing more ridiculous .
Elinor , while she waited in silence and immovable gravity , the conclusion of such folly , could not restrain her eyes from being fixed on him with a look that spoke all the contempt it excited .
It was a look , however , very well bestowed , for it relieved her own feelings , and gave no intelligence to him .
He was recalled from wit to wisdom , not by any reproof of her 's , but by his own sensibility .
`` We may treat it as a joke , '' said he , at last , recovering from the affected laugh which had considerably lengthened out the genuine gaiety of the moment -- '' but , upon my soul , it is a most serious business .
Poor Edward !
he is ruined for ever .
I am extremely sorry for it -- for I know him to be a very good-hearted creature ; as well-meaning a fellow perhaps , as any in the world .
You must not judge of him , Miss Dashwood , from YOUR slight acquaintance. -- Poor Edward ! -- His manners are certainly not the happiest in nature. -- But we are not all born , you know , with the same powers , -- the same address. -- Poor fellow ! -- to see him in a circle of strangers ! -- to be sure it was pitiable enough ! -- but upon my soul , I believe he has as good a heart as any in the kingdom ; and I declare and protest to you I never was so shocked in my life , as when it all burst forth .
I could not believe it. -- My mother was the first person who told me of it ; and I , feeling myself called on to act with resolution , immediately said to her , 'My dear madam , I do not know what you may intend to do on the occasion , but as for myself , I must say , that if Edward does marry this young woman , I never will see him again . '
That was what I said immediately. -- I was most uncommonly shocked , indeed ! -- Poor Edward ! -- he has done for himself completely -- shut himself out for ever from all decent society ! -- but , as I directly said to my mother , I am not in the least surprised at it ; from his style of education , it was always to be expected .
My poor mother was half frantic . ''
`` Have you ever seen the lady ? ''
`` Yes ; once , while she was staying in this house , I happened to drop in for ten minutes ; and I saw quite enough of her .
The merest awkward country girl , without style , or elegance , and almost without beauty. -- I remember her perfectly .
Just the kind of girl I should suppose likely to captivate poor Edward .
I offered immediately , as soon as my mother related the affair to me , to talk to him myself , and dissuade him from the match ; but it was too late THEN , I found , to do any thing , for unluckily , I was not in the way at first , and knew nothing of it till after the breach had taken place , when it was not for me , you know , to interfere .
But had I been informed of it a few hours earlier -- I think it is most probable -- that something might have been hit on .
I certainly should have represented it to Edward in a very strong light .
'My dear fellow , ' I should have said , 'consider what you are doing .
You are making a most disgraceful connection , and such a one as your family are unanimous in disapproving . '
I can not help thinking , in short , that means might have been found .
But now it is all too late .
He must be starved , you know ; -- that is certain ; absolutely starved . ''
He had just settled this point with great composure , when the entrance of Mrs .
John Dashwood put an end to the subject .
But though SHE never spoke of it out of her own family , Elinor could see its influence on her mind , in the something like confusion of countenance with which she entered , and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to herself .
She even proceeded so far as to be concerned to find that Elinor and her sister were so soon to leave town , as she had hoped to see more of them ; -- an exertion in which her husband , who attended her into the room , and hung enamoured over her accents , seemed to distinguish every thing that was most affectionate and graceful .
CHAPTER 42 One other short call in Harley Street , in which Elinor received her brother 's congratulations on their travelling so far towards Barton without any expense , and on Colonel Brandon 's being to follow them to Cleveland in a day or two , completed the intercourse of the brother and sisters in town ; -- and a faint invitation from Fanny , to come to Norland whenever it should happen to be in their way , which of all things was the most unlikely to occur , with a more warm , though less public , assurance , from John to Elinor , of the promptitude with which he should come to see her at Delaford , was all that foretold any meeting in the country .
It amused her to observe that all her friends seemed determined to send her to Delaford ; -- a place , in which , of all others , she would now least chuse to visit , or wish to reside ; for not only was it considered as her future home by her brother and Mrs .
Jennings , but even Lucy , when they parted , gave her a pressing invitation to visit her there .
Very early in April , and tolerably early in the day , the two parties from Hanover Square and Berkeley Street set out from their respective homes , to meet , by appointment , on the road .
For the convenience of Charlotte and her child , they were to be more than two days on their journey , and Mr .
Palmer , travelling more expeditiously with Colonel Brandon , was to join them at Cleveland soon after their arrival .
Marianne , few as had been her hours of comfort in London , and eager as she had long been to quit it , could not , when it came to the point , bid adieu to the house in which she had for the last time enjoyed those hopes , and that confidence , in Willoughby , which were now extinguished for ever , without great pain .
Nor could she leave the place in which Willoughby remained , busy in new engagements , and new schemes , in which SHE could have no share , without shedding many tears .
Elinor 's satisfaction , at the moment of removal , was more positive .
She had no such object for her lingering thoughts to fix on , she left no creature behind , from whom it would give her a moment 's regret to be divided for ever , she was pleased to be free herself from the persecution of Lucy 's friendship , she was grateful for bringing her sister away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage , and she looked forward with hope to what a few months of tranquility at Barton might do towards restoring Marianne 's peace of mind , and confirming her own .
Their journey was safely performed .
The second day brought them into the cherished , or the prohibited , county of Somerset , for as such was it dwelt on by turns in Marianne 's imagination ; and in the forenoon of the third they drove up to Cleveland .
Cleveland was a spacious , modern-built house , situated on a sloping lawn .
It had no park , but the pleasure-grounds were tolerably extensive ; and like every other place of the same degree of importance , it had its open shrubbery , and closer wood walk , a road of smooth gravel winding round a plantation , led to the front , the lawn was dotted over with timber , the house itself was under the guardianship of the fir , the mountain-ash , and the acacia , and a thick screen of them altogether , interspersed with tall Lombardy poplars , shut out the offices .
Marianne entered the house with a heart swelling with emotion from the consciousness of being only eighty miles from Barton , and not thirty from Combe Magna ; and before she had been five minutes within its walls , while the others were busily helping Charlotte to show her child to the housekeeper , she quitted it again , stealing away through the winding shrubberies , now just beginning to be in beauty , to gain a distant eminence ; where , from its Grecian temple , her eye , wandering over a wide tract of country to the south-east , could fondly rest on the farthest ridge of hills in the horizon , and fancy that from their summits Combe Magna might be seen .
In such moments of precious , invaluable misery , she rejoiced in tears of agony to be at Cleveland ; and as she returned by a different circuit to the house , feeling all the happy privilege of country liberty , of wandering from place to place in free and luxurious solitude , she resolved to spend almost every hour of every day while she remained with the Palmers , in the indulgence of such solitary rambles .
She returned just in time to join the others as they quitted the house , on an excursion through its more immediate premises ; and the rest of the morning was easily whiled away , in lounging round the kitchen garden , examining the bloom upon its walls , and listening to the gardener 's lamentations upon blights , in dawdling through the green-house , where the loss of her favourite plants , unwarily exposed , and nipped by the lingering frost , raised the laughter of Charlotte , -- and in visiting her poultry-yard , where , in the disappointed hopes of her dairy-maid , by hens forsaking their nests , or being stolen by a fox , or in the rapid decrease of a promising young brood , she found fresh sources of merriment .
The morning was fine and dry , and Marianne , in her plan of employment abroad , had not calculated for any change of weather during their stay at Cleveland .
With great surprise therefore , did she find herself prevented by a settled rain from going out again after dinner .
She had depended on a twilight walk to the Grecian temple , and perhaps all over the grounds , and an evening merely cold or damp would not have deterred her from it ; but a heavy and settled rain even SHE could not fancy dry or pleasant weather for walking .
Their party was small , and the hours passed quietly away .
Mrs .
Palmer had her child , and Mrs .
Jennings her carpet-work ; they talked of the friends they had left behind , arranged Lady Middleton 's engagements , and wondered whether Mr .
Palmer and Colonel Brandon would get farther than Reading that night .
Elinor , however little concerned in it , joined in their discourse ; and Marianne , who had the knack of finding her way in every house to the library , however it might be avoided by the family in general , soon procured herself a book .
Nothing was wanting on Mrs .
Palmer 's side that constant and friendly good humour could do , to make them feel themselves welcome .
The openness and heartiness of her manner more than atoned for that want of recollection and elegance which made her often deficient in the forms of politeness ; her kindness , recommended by so pretty a face , was engaging ; her folly , though evident was not disgusting , because it was not conceited ; and Elinor could have forgiven every thing but her laugh .
The two gentlemen arrived the next day to a very late dinner , affording a pleasant enlargement of the party , and a very welcome variety to their conversation , which a long morning of the same continued rain had reduced very low .
Elinor had seen so little of Mr .
Palmer , and in that little had seen so much variety in his address to her sister and herself , that she knew not what to expect to find him in his own family .
She found him , however , perfectly the gentleman in his behaviour to all his visitors , and only occasionally rude to his wife and her mother ; she found him very capable of being a pleasant companion , and only prevented from being so always , by too great an aptitude to fancy himself as much superior to people in general , as he must feel himself to be to Mrs .
Jennings and Charlotte .
For the rest of his character and habits , they were marked , as far as Elinor could perceive , with no traits at all unusual in his sex and time of life .
He was nice in his eating , uncertain in his hours ; fond of his child , though affecting to slight it ; and idled away the mornings at billiards , which ought to have been devoted to business .
She liked him , however , upon the whole , much better than she had expected , and in her heart was not sorry that she could like him no more ; -- not sorry to be driven by the observation of his Epicurism , his selfishness , and his conceit , to rest with complacency on the remembrance of Edward 's generous temper , simple taste , and diffident feelings .
Of Edward , or at least of some of his concerns , she now received intelligence from Colonel Brandon , who had been into Dorsetshire lately ; and who , treating her at once as the disinterested friend of Mr .
Ferrars , and the kind of confidant of himself , talked to her a great deal of the parsonage at Delaford , described its deficiencies , and told her what he meant to do himself towards removing them. -- His behaviour to her in this , as well as in every other particular , his open pleasure in meeting her after an absence of only ten days , his readiness to converse with her , and his deference for her opinion , might very well justify Mrs .
Jennings 's persuasion of his attachment , and would have been enough , perhaps , had not Elinor still , as from the first , believed Marianne his real favourite , to make her suspect it herself .
But as it was , such a notion had scarcely ever entered her head , except by Mrs .
Jennings 's suggestion ; and she could not help believing herself the nicest observer of the two ; -- she watched his eyes , while Mrs .
Jennings thought only of his behaviour ; -- and while his looks of anxious solicitude on Marianne 's feeling , in her head and throat , the beginning of a heavy cold , because unexpressed by words , entirely escaped the latter lady 's observation ; -- SHE could discover in them the quick feelings , and needless alarm of a lover .
Two delighful twilight walks on the third and fourth evenings of her being there , not merely on the dry gravel of the shrubbery , but all over the grounds , and especially in the most distant parts of them , where there was something more of wildness than in the rest , where the trees were the oldest , and the grass was the longest and wettest , had -- assisted by the still greater imprudence of sitting in her wet shoes and stockings -- given Marianne a cold so violent as , though for a day or two trifled with or denied , would force itself by increasing ailments on the concern of every body , and the notice of herself .
Prescriptions poured in from all quarters , and as usual , were all declined .
Though heavy and feverish , with a pain in her limbs , and a cough , and a sore throat , a good night's rest was to cure her entirely ; and it was with difficulty that Elinor prevailed on her , when she went to bed , to try one or two of the simplest of the remedies .
CHAPTER 43 Marianne got up the next morning at her usual time ; to every inquiry replied that she was better , and tried to prove herself so , by engaging in her accustomary employments .
But a day spent in sitting shivering over the fire with a book in her hand , which she was unable to read , or in lying , weary and languid , on a sofa , did not speak much in favour of her amendment ; and when , at last , she went early to bed , more and more indisposed , Colonel Brandon was only astonished at her sister 's composure , who , though attending and nursing her the whole day , against Marianne inclination , and forcing proper medicines on her at night , trusted , like Marianne , to the certainty and efficacy of sleep , and felt no real alarm .
A very restless and feverish night , however , disappointed the expectation of both ; and when Marianne , after persisting in rising , confessed herself unable to sit up , and returned voluntarily to her bed , Elinor was very ready to adopt Mrs .
Jennings 's advice , of sending for the Palmers ' apothecary .
He came , examined his patient , and though encouraging Miss Dashwood to expect that a very few days would restore her sister to health , yet , by pronouncing her disorder to have a putrid tendency , and allowing the word `` infection '' to pass his lips , gave instant alarm to Mrs .
Palmer , on her baby 's account .
Mrs .
Jennings , who had been inclined from the first to think Marianne 's complaint more serious than Elinor , now looked very grave on Mr .
Harris 's report , and confirming Charlotte 's fears and caution , urged the necessity of her immediate removal with her infant ; and Mr .
Palmer , though treating their apprehensions as idle , found the anxiety and importunity of his wife too great to be withstood .
Her departure , therefore , was fixed on ; and within an hour after Mr .
Harris 's arrival , she set off , with her little boy and his nurse , for the house of a near relation of Mr .
Palmer 's , who lived a few miles on the other side of Bath ; whither her husband promised , at her earnest entreaty , to join her in a day or two ; and whither she was almost equally urgent with her mother to accompany her .
Mrs .
Jennings , however , with a kindness of heart which made Elinor really love her , declared her resolution of not stirring from Cleveland as long as Marianne remained ill , and of endeavouring , by her own attentive care , to supply to her the place of the mother she had taken her from ; and Elinor found her on every occasion a most willing and active helpmate , desirous to share in all her fatigues , and often by her better experience in nursing , of material use .
Poor Marianne , languid and low from the nature of her malady , and feeling herself universally ill , could no longer hope that tomorrow would find her recovered ; and the idea of what tomorrow would have produced , but for this unlucky illness , made every ailment severe ; for on that day they were to have begun their journey home ; and , attended the whole way by a servant of Mrs .
Jennings , were to have taken their mother by surprise on the following forenoon .
The little she said was all in lamentation of this inevitable delay ; though Elinor tried to raise her spirits , and make her believe , as she THEN really believed herself , that it would be a very short one .
The next day produced little or no alteration in the state of the patient ; she certainly was not better , and , except that there was no amendment , did not appear worse .
Their party was now farther reduced ; for Mr .
Palmer , though very unwilling to go as well from real humanity and good-nature , as from a dislike of appearing to be frightened away by his wife , was persuaded at last by Colonel Brandon to perform his promise of following her ; and while he was preparing to go , Colonel Brandon himself , with a much greater exertion , began to talk of going likewise. -- Here , however , the kindness of Mrs .
Jennings interposed most acceptably ; for to send the Colonel away while his love was in so much uneasiness on her sister's account , would be to deprive them both , she thought , of every comfort ; and therefore telling him at once that his stay at Cleveland was necessary to herself , that she should want him to play at piquet of an evening , while Miss Dashwood was above with her sister , & c. she urged him so strongly to remain , that he , who was gratifying the first wish of his own heart by a compliance , could not long even affect to demur ; especially as Mrs .
Jennings's entreaty was warmly seconded by Mr .
Palmer , who seemed to feel a relief to himself , in leaving behind him a person so well able to assist or advise Miss Dashwood in any emergence .
Marianne was , of course , kept in ignorance of all these arrangements .
She knew not that she had been the means of sending the owners of Cleveland away , in about seven days from the time of their arrival .
It gave her no surprise that she saw nothing of Mrs .
Palmer ; and as it gave her likewise no concern , she never mentioned her name .
Two days passed away from the time of Mr .
Palmer 's departure , and her situation continued , with little variation , the same .
Mr .
Harris , who attended her every day , still talked boldly of a speedy recovery , and Miss Dashwood was equally sanguine ; but the expectation of the others was by no means so cheerful .
Mrs .
Jennings had determined very early in the seizure that Marianne would never get over it , and Colonel Brandon , who was chiefly of use in listening to Mrs .
Jennings 's forebodings , was not in a state of mind to resist their influence .
He tried to reason himself out of fears , which the different judgment of the apothecary seemed to render absurd ; but the many hours of each day in which he was left entirely alone , were but too favourable for the admission of every melancholy idea , and he could not expel from his mind the persuasion that he should see Marianne no more .
On the morning of the third day however , the gloomy anticipations of both were almost done away ; for when Mr .
Harris arrived , he declared his patient materially better .
Her pulse was much stronger , and every symptom more favourable than on the preceding visit .
Elinor , confirmed in every pleasant hope , was all cheerfulness ; rejoicing that in her letters to her mother , she had pursued her own judgment rather than her friend 's , in making very light of the indisposition which delayed them at Cleveland ; and almost fixing on the time when Marianne would be able to travel .
But the day did not close so auspiciously as it began. -- Towards the evening Marianne became ill again , growing more heavy , restless , and uncomfortable than before .
Her sister , however , still sanguine , was willing to attribute the change to nothing more than the fatigue of having sat up to have her bed made ; and carefully administering the cordials prescribed , saw her , with satisfaction , sink at last into a slumber , from which she expected the most beneficial effects .
Her sleep , though not so quiet as Elinor wished to see it , lasted a considerable time ; and anxious to observe the result of it herself , she resolved to sit with her during the whole of it .
Mrs .
Jennings , knowing nothing of any change in the patient , went unusually early to bed ; her maid , who was one of the principal nurses , was recreating herself in the housekeeper 's room , and Elinor remained alone with Marianne .
The repose of the latter became more and more disturbed ; and her sister , who watched , with unremitting attention her continual change of posture , and heard the frequent but inarticulate sounds of complaint which passed her lips , was almost wishing to rouse her from so painful a slumber , when Marianne , suddenly awakened by some accidental noise in the house , started hastily up , and , with feverish wildness , cried out , -- '' Is mama coming ? -- '' '' Not yet , '' cried the other , concealing her terror , and assisting Marianne to lie down again , `` but she will be here , I hope , before it is long .
It is a great way , you know , from hence to Barton . ''
`` But she must not go round by London , '' cried Marianne , in the same hurried manner .
`` I shall never see her , if she goes by London . ''
Elinor perceived with alarm that she was not quite herself , and , while attempting to soothe her , eagerly felt her pulse .
It was lower and quicker than ever !
and Marianne , still talking wildly of mama , her alarm increased so rapidly , as to determine her on sending instantly for Mr .
Harris , and despatching a messenger to Barton for her mother .
To consult with Colonel Brandon on the best means of effecting the latter , was a thought which immediately followed the resolution of its performance ; and as soon she had rung up the maid to take her place by her sister , she hastened down to the drawing-room , where she knew he was generally to be found at a much later hour than the present .
It was no time for hesitation .
Her fears and her difficulties were immediately before him .
Her fears , he had no courage , no confidence to attempt the removal of : -- he listened to them in silent despondence ; -- but her difficulties were instantly obviated , for with a readiness that seemed to speak the occasion , and the service pre-arranged in his mind , he offered himself as the messenger who should fetch Mrs .
Dashwood .
Elinor made no resistance that was not easily overcome .
She thanked him with brief , though fervent gratitude , and while he went to hurry off his servant with a message to Mr .
Harris , and an order for post-horses directly , she wrote a few lines to her mother .
The comfort of such a friend at that moment as Colonel Brandon -- or such a companion for her mother , -- how gratefully was it felt ! -- a companion whose judgment would guide , whose attendance must relieve , and whose friendship might soothe her ! -- as far as the shock of such a summons COULD be lessened to her , his presence , his manners , his assistance , would lessen it .
HE , meanwhile , whatever he might feel , acted with all the firmness of a collected mind , made every necessary arrangement with the utmost despatch , and calculated with exactness the time in which she might look for his return .
Not a moment was lost in delay of any kind .
The horses arrived , even before they were expected , and Colonel Brandon only pressing her hand with a look of solemnity , and a few words spoken too low to reach her ear , hurried into the carriage .
It was then about twelve o'clock , and she returned to her sister 's apartment to wait for the arrival of the apothecary , and to watch by her the rest of the night .
It was a night of almost equal suffering to both .
Hour after hour passed away in sleepless pain and delirium on Marianne 's side , and in the most cruel anxiety on Elinor 's , before Mr .
Harris appeared .
Her apprehensions once raised , paid by their excess for all her former security ; and the servant who sat up with her , for she would not allow Mrs .
Jennings to be called , only tortured her more , by hints of what her mistress had always thought .
Marianne 's ideas were still , at intervals , fixed incoherently on her mother , and whenever she mentioned her name , it gave a pang to the heart of poor Elinor , who , reproaching herself for having trifled with so many days of illness , and wretched for some immediate relief , fancied that all relief might soon be in vain , that every thing had been delayed too long , and pictured to herself her suffering mother arriving too late to see this darling child , or to see her rational .
She was on the point of sending again for Mr .
Harris , or if HE could not come , for some other advice , when the former -- but not till after five o'clock -- arrived .
His opinion , however , made some little amends for his delay , for though acknowledging a very unexpected and unpleasant alteration in his patient , he would not allow the danger to be material , and talked of the relief which a fresh mode of treatment must procure , with a confidence which , in a lesser degree , was communicated to Elinor .
He promised to call again in the course of three or four hours , and left both the patient and her anxious attendant more composed than he had found them .
With strong concern , and with many reproaches for not being called to their aid , did Mrs .
Jennings hear in the morning of what had passed .
Her former apprehensions , now with greater reason restored , left her no doubt of the event ; and though trying to speak comfort to Elinor , her conviction of her sister 's danger would not allow her to offer the comfort of hope .
Her heart was really grieved .
The rapid decay , the early death of a girl so young , so lovely as Marianne , must have struck a less interested person with concern .
On Mrs .
Jennings 's compassion she had other claims .
She had been for three months her companion , was still under her care , and she was known to have been greatly injured , and long unhappy .
The distress of her sister too , particularly a favourite , was before her ; -- and as for their mother , when Mrs .
Jennings considered that Marianne might probably be to HER what Charlotte was to herself , her sympathy in HER sufferings was very sincere .
Mr .
Harris was punctual in his second visit ; -- but he came to be disappointed in his hopes of what the last would produce .
His medicines had failed ; -- the fever was unabated ; and Marianne only more quiet -- not more herself -- remained in a heavy stupor .
Elinor , catching all , and more than all , his fears in a moment , proposed to call in further advice .
But he judged it unnecessary : he had still something more to try , some more fresh application , of whose success he was as confident as the last , and his visit concluded with encouraging assurances which reached the ear , but could not enter the heart of Miss Dashwood .
She was calm , except when she thought of her mother ; but she was almost hopeless ; and in this state she continued till noon , scarcely stirring from her sister 's bed , her thoughts wandering from one image of grief , one suffering friend to another , and her spirits oppressed to the utmost by the conversation of Mrs .
Jennings , who scrupled not to attribute the severity and danger of this attack to the many weeks of previous indisposition which Marianne 's disappointment had brought on .
Elinor felt all the reasonableness of the idea , and it gave fresh misery to her reflections .
About noon , however , she began -- but with a caution -- a dread of disappointment which for some time kept her silent , even to her friend -- to fancy , to hope she could perceive a slight amendment in her sister 's pulse ; -- she waited , watched , and examined it again and again ; -- and at last , with an agitation more difficult to bury under exterior calmness , than all her foregoing distress , ventured to communicate her hopes .
Mrs .
Jennings , though forced , on examination , to acknowledge a temporary revival , tried to keep her young friend from indulging a thought of its continuance ; -- and Elinor , conning over every injunction of distrust , told herself likewise not to hope .
But it was too late .
Hope had already entered ; and feeling all its anxious flutter , she bent over her sister to watch -- she hardly knew for what .
Half an hour passed away , and the favourable symptom yet blessed her .
Others even arose to confirm it .
Her breath , her skin , her lips , all flattered Elinor with signs of amendment ; and Marianne fixed her eyes on her with a rational , though languid , gaze .
Anxiety and hope now oppressed her in equal degrees , and left her no moment of tranquillity till the arrival of Mr .
Harris at four o'clock ; -- when his assurances , his felicitations on a recovery in her sister even surpassing his expectation , gave her confidence , comfort , and tears of joy .
Marianne was in every respect materially better , and he declared her entirely out of danger .
Mrs .
Jennings , perhaps satisfied with the partial justification of her forebodings which had been found in their late alarm , allowed herself to trust in his judgment , and admitted , with unfeigned joy , and soon with unequivocal cheerfulness , the probability of an entire recovery .
Elinor could not be cheerful .
Her joy was of a different kind , and led to any thing rather than to gaiety .
Marianne restored to life , health , friends , and to her doting mother , was an idea to fill her heart with sensations of exquisite comfort , and expand it in fervent gratitude ; -- but it lead to no outward demonstrations of joy , no words , no smiles .
All within Elinor 's breast was satisfaction , silent and strong .
She continued by the side of her sister , with little intermission the whole afternoon , calming every fear , satisfying every inquiry of her enfeebled spirits , supplying every succour , and watching almost every look and every breath .
The possibility of a relapse would of course , in some moments , occur to remind her of what anxiety was -- but when she saw , on her frequent and minute examination , that every symptom of recovery continued , and saw Marianne at six o'clock sink into a quiet , steady , and to all appearance comfortable , sleep , she silenced every doubt .
The time was now drawing on , when Colonel Brandon might be expected back .
At ten o'clock , she trusted , or at least not much later her mother would be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which she must now be travelling towards them .
The Colonel , too ! -- perhaps scarcely less an object of pity ! -- Oh ! -- how slow was the progress of time which yet kept them in ignorance !
At seven o'clock , leaving Marianne still sweetly asleep , she joined Mrs .
Jennings in the drawing-room to tea .
Of breakfast she had been kept by her fears , and of dinner by their sudden reverse , from eating much ; -- and the present refreshment , therefore , with such feelings of content as she brought to it , was particularly welcome .
Mrs .
Jennings would have persuaded her , at its conclusion , to take some rest before her mother 's arrival , and allow HER to take her place by Marianne ; but Elinor had no sense of fatigue , no capability of sleep at that moment about her , and she was not to be kept away from her sister an unnecessary instant .
Mrs .
Jennings therefore attending her up stairs into the sick chamber , to satisfy herself that all continued right , left her there again to her charge and her thoughts , and retired to her own room to write letters and sleep .
The night was cold and stormy .
The wind roared round the house , and the rain beat against the windows ; but Elinor , all happiness within , regarded it not .
Marianne slept through every blast ; and the travellers -- they had a rich reward in store , for every present inconvenience .
The clock struck eight .
Had it been ten , Elinor would have been convinced that at that moment she heard a carriage driving up to the house ; and so strong was the persuasion that she DID , in spite of the ALMOST impossibility of their being already come , that she moved into the adjoining dressing-closet and opened a window shutter , to be satisfied of the truth .
She instantly saw that her ears had not deceived her .
The flaring lamps of a carriage were immediately in view .
By their uncertain light she thought she could discern it to be drawn by four horses ; and this , while it told the excess of her poor mother 's alarm , gave some explanation to such unexpected rapidity .
Never in her life had Elinor found it so difficult to be calm , as at that moment .
The knowledge of what her mother must be feeling as the carriage stopt at the door -- of her doubt -- her dread -- perhaps her despair ! -- and of what SHE had to tell ! -- with such knowledge it was impossible to be calm .
All that remained to be done was to be speedy ; and , therefore staying only till she could leave Mrs .
Jennings 's maid with her sister , she hurried down stairs .
The bustle in the vestibule , as she passed along an inner lobby , assured her that they were already in the house .
She rushed to the drawing-room , -- she entered it , -- and saw only Willoughby .
CHAPTER 44 Elinor , starting back with a look of horror at the sight of him , obeyed the first impulse of her heart in turning instantly to quit the room , and her hand was already on the lock , when its action was suspended by his hastily advancing , and saying , in a voice rather of command than supplication , '' Miss Dashwood , for half an hour -- for ten minutes -- I entreat you to stay . ''
`` No , sir , '' she replied with firmness , `` I shall NOT stay .
Your business can not be with ME .
The servants , I suppose , forgot to tell you that Mr .
Palmer was not in the house . ''
`` Had they told me , '' he cried with vehemence , '' that Mr .
Palmer and all his relations were at the devil , it would not have turned me from the door .
My business is with you , and only you . ''
`` With me ! ''
-- in the utmost amazement -- '' well , sir , -- be quick -- and if you can -- less violent . ''
`` Sit down , and I will be both . ''
She hesitated ; she knew not what to do .
The possibility of Colonel Brandon 's arriving and finding her there , came across her .
But she had promised to hear him , and her curiosity no less than her honor was engaged .
After a moment 's recollection , therefore , concluding that prudence required dispatch , and that her acquiescence would best promote it , she walked silently towards the table , and sat down .
He took the opposite chair , and for half a minute not a word was said by either .
`` Pray be quick , sir , '' -- said Elinor , impatiently ; -- '' I have no time to spare . ''
He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation , and seemed not to hear her .
`` Your sister , '' said he , with abruptness , a moment afterwards -- '' is out of danger .
I heard it from the servant .
God be praised ! -- But is it true ?
is it really true ? ''
Elinor would not speak .
He repeated the inquiry with yet greater eagerness .
`` For God 's sake tell me , is she out of danger , or is she not ? ''
`` We hope she is . ''
He rose up , and walked across the room .
`` Had I known as much half an hour ago -- But since I AM here , '' -- speaking with a forced vivacity as he returned to his seat -- '' what does it signify ? -- For once , Miss Dashwood -- it will be the last time , perhaps -- let us be cheerful together. -- I am in a fine mood for gaiety. -- Tell me honestly '' -- a deeper glow overspreading his cheeks -- '' do you think me most a knave or a fool ? ''
Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than ever .
She began to think that be must be in liquor ; -- the strangeness of such a visit , and of such manners , seemed no otherwise intelligible ; and with this impression she immediately rose , saying , '' Mr .
Willoughby , I advise you at present to return to Combe -- I am not at leisure to remain with you longer. -- Whatever your business may be with me , will it be better recollected and explained to-morrow . ''
`` I understand you , '' he replied , with an expressive smile , and a voice perfectly calm ; `` yes , I am very drunk. -- A pint of porter with my cold beef at Marlborough was enough to over-set me . ''
`` At Marlborough ! ''
-- cried Elinor , more and more at a loss to understand what he would be at .
`` Yes , -- I left London this morning at eight o'clock , and the only ten minutes I have spent out of my chaise since that time procured me a nuncheon at Marlborough . ''
The steadiness of his manner , and the intelligence of his eye as he spoke , convincing Elinor , that whatever other unpardonable folly might bring him to Cleveland , he was not brought there by intoxication , she said , after a moment 's recollection , '' Mr .
Willoughby , you OUGHT to feel , and I certainly DO -- that after what has passed -- your coming here in this manner , and forcing yourself upon my notice , requires a very particular excuse. -- What is it , that you mean by it ? ''
-- '' I mean , '' -- said he , with serious energy -- '' if I can , to make you hate me one degree less than you do NOW .
I mean to offer some kind of explanation , some kind of apology , for the past ; to open my whole heart to you , and by convincing you , that though I have been always a blockhead , I have not been always a rascal , to obtain something like forgiveness from Ma -- from your sister . ''
`` Is this the real reason of your coming ? ''
`` Upon my soul it is , '' -- was his answer , with a warmth which brought all the former Willoughby to her remembrance , and in spite of herself made her think him sincere .
`` If that is all , you may be satisfied already , -- for Marianne DOES -- she has LONG forgiven you . ''
`` Has she ? ''
-- he cried , in the same eager tone. -- '' Then she has forgiven me before she ought to have done it .
But she shall forgive me again , and on more reasonable grounds. -- NOW will you listen to me ? ''
Elinor bowed her assent .
`` I do not know , '' said he , after a pause of expectation on her side , and thoughtfulness on his own , -- '' how YOU may have accounted for my behaviour to your sister , or what diabolical motive you may have imputed to me. -- Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me , -- it is worth the trial however , and you shall hear every thing .
When I first became intimate in your family , I had no other intention , no other view in the acquaintance than to pass my time pleasantly while I was obliged to remain in Devonshire , more pleasantly than I had ever done before .
Your sister 's lovely person and interesting manners could not but please me ; and her behaviour to me almost from the first , was of a kind -- It is astonishing , when I reflect on what it was , and what SHE was , that my heart should have been so insensible !
But at first I must confess , my vanity only was elevated by it .
Careless of her happiness , thinking only of my own amusement , giving way to feelings which I had always been too much in the habit of indulging , I endeavoured , by every means in my power , to make myself pleasing to her , without any design of returning her affection . ''
Miss Dashwood , at this point , turning her eyes on him with the most angry contempt , stopped him , by saying , '' It is hardly worth while , Mr .
Willoughby , for you to relate , or for me to listen any longer .
Such a beginning as this can not be followed by any thing. -- Do not let me be pained by hearing any thing more on the subject . ''
`` I insist on you hearing the whole of it , '' he replied , '' My fortune was never large , and I had always been expensive , always in the habit of associating with people of better income than myself .
Every year since my coming of age , or even before , I believe , had added to my debts ; and though the death of my old cousin , Mrs .
Smith , was to set me free ; yet that event being uncertain , and possibly far distant , it had been for some time my intention to re-establish my circumstances by marrying a woman of fortune .
To attach myself to your sister , therefore , was not a thing to be thought of ; -- and with a meanness , selfishness , cruelty -- which no indignant , no contemptuous look , even of yours , Miss Dashwood , can ever reprobate too much -- I was acting in this manner , trying to engage her regard , without a thought of returning it. -- But one thing may be said for me : even in that horrid state of selfish vanity , I did not know the extent of the injury I meditated , because I did not THEN know what it was to love .
But have I ever known it ? -- Well may it be doubted ; for , had I really loved , could I have sacrificed my feelings to vanity , to avarice ? -- or , what is more , could I have sacrificed hers ? -- But I have done it .
To avoid a comparative poverty , which her affection and her society would have deprived of all its horrors , I have , by raising myself to affluence , lost every thing that could make it a blessing . ''
`` You did then , '' said Elinor , a little softened , '' believe yourself at one time attached to her ? ''
`` To have resisted such attractions , to have withstood such tenderness ! -- Is there a man on earth who could have done it ? -- Yes , I found myself , by insensible degrees , sincerely fond of her ; and the happiest hours of my life were what I spent with her when I felt my intentions were strictly honourable , and my feelings blameless .
Even THEN , however , when fully determined on paying my addresses to her , I allowed myself most improperly to put off , from day to day , the moment of doing it , from an unwillingness to enter into an engagement while my circumstances were so greatly embarrassed .
I will not reason here -- nor will I stop for YOU to expatiate on the absurdity , and the worse than absurdity , of scrupling to engage my faith where my honour was already bound .
The event has proved , that I was a cunning fool , providing with great circumspection for a possible opportunity of making myself contemptible and wretched for ever .
At last , however , my resolution was taken , and I had determined , as soon as I could engage her alone , to justify the attentions I had so invariably paid her , and openly assure her of an affection which I had already taken such pains to display .
But in the interim -- in the interim of the very few hours that were to pass , before I could have an opportunity of speaking with her in private -- a circumstance occurred -- an unlucky circumstance , to ruin all my resolution , and with it all my comfort .
A discovery took place , '' -- here he hesitated and looked down. -- '' Mrs .
Smith had somehow or other been informed , I imagine by some distant relation , whose interest it was to deprive me of her favour , of an affair , a connection -- but I need not explain myself farther , '' he added , looking at her with an heightened colour and an enquiring eye -- '' your particular intimacy -- you have probably heard the whole story long ago . ''
`` I have , '' returned Elinor , colouring likewise , and hardening her heart anew against any compassion for him , '' I have heard it all .
And how you will explain away any part of your guilt in that dreadful business , I confess is beyond my comprehension . ''
`` Remember , '' cried Willoughby , `` from whom you received the account .
Could it be an impartial one ?
I acknowledge that her situation and her character ought to have been respected by me .
I do not mean to justify myself , but at the same time can not leave you to suppose that I have nothing to urge -- that because she was injured she was irreproachable , and because I was a libertine , SHE must be a saint .
If the violence of her passions , the weakness of her understanding -- I do not mean , however , to defend myself .
Her affection for me deserved better treatment , and I often , with great self-reproach , recall the tenderness which , for a very short time , had the power of creating any return .
I wish -- I heartily wish it had never been .
But I have injured more than herself ; and I have injured one , whose affection for me -- ( may I say it ? )
was scarcely less warm than hers ; and whose mind -- Oh !
how infinitely superior ! ''
-- '' Your indifference , however , towards that unfortunate girl -- I must say it , unpleasant to me as the discussion of such a subject may well be -- your indifference is no apology for your cruel neglect of her .
Do not think yourself excused by any weakness , any natural defect of understanding on her side , in the wanton cruelty so evident on yours .
You must have known , that while you were enjoying yourself in Devonshire pursuing fresh schemes , always gay , always happy , she was reduced to the extremest indigence . ''
`` But , upon my soul , I did NOT know it , '' he warmly replied ; `` I did not recollect that I had omitted to give her my direction ; and common sense might have told her how to find it out . ''
`` Well , sir , and what said Mrs .
Smith ? ''
`` She taxed me with the offence at once , and my confusion may be guessed .
The purity of her life , the formality of her notions , her ignorance of the world -- every thing was against me .
The matter itself I could not deny , and vain was every endeavour to soften it .
She was previously disposed , I believe , to doubt the morality of my conduct in general , and was moreover discontented with the very little attention , the very little portion of my time that I had bestowed on her , in my present visit .
In short , it ended in a total breach .
By one measure I might have saved myself .
In the height of her morality , good woman !
she offered to forgive the past , if I would marry Eliza .
That could not be -- and I was formally dismissed from her favour and her house .
The night following this affair -- I was to go the next morning -- was spent by me in deliberating on what my future conduct should be .
The struggle was great -- but it ended too soon .
My affection for Marianne , my thorough conviction of her attachment to me -- it was all insufficient to outweigh that dread of poverty , or get the better of those false ideas of the necessity of riches , which I was naturally inclined to feel , and expensive society had increased .
I had reason to believe myself secure of my present wife , if I chose to address her , and I persuaded myself to think that nothing else in common prudence remained for me to do .
A heavy scene however awaited me , before I could leave Devonshire ; -- I was engaged to dine with you on that very day ; some apology was therefore necessary for my breaking this engagement .
But whether I should write this apology , or deliver it in person , was a point of long debate .
To see Marianne , I felt , would be dreadful , and I even doubted whether I could see her again , and keep to my resolution .
In that point , however , I undervalued my own magnanimity , as the event declared ; for I went , I saw her , and saw her miserable , and left her miserable -- and left her hoping never to see her again . ''
`` Why did you call , Mr .
Willoughby ? ''
said Elinor , reproachfully ; `` a note would have answered every purpose. -- Why was it necessary to call ? ''
`` It was necessary to my own pride .
I could not bear to leave the country in a manner that might lead you , or the rest of the neighbourhood , to suspect any part of what had really passed between Mrs .
Smith and myself -- and I resolved therefore on calling at the cottage , in my way to Honiton .
The sight of your dear sister , however , was really dreadful ; and , to heighten the matter , I found her alone .
You were all gone I do not know where .
I had left her only the evening before , so fully , so firmly resolved within my self on doing right !
A few hours were to have engaged her to me for ever ; and I remember how happy , how gay were my spirits , as I walked from the cottage to Allenham , satisfied with myself , delighted with every body !
But in this , our last interview of friendship , I approached her with a sense of guilt that almost took from me the power of dissembling .
Her sorrow , her disappointment , her deep regret , when I told her that I was obliged to leave Devonshire so immediately -- I never shall forget it -- united too with such reliance , such confidence in me ! -- Oh , God ! -- what a hard-hearted rascal I was ! ''
They were both silent for a few moments .
Elinor first spoke .
`` Did you tell her that you should soon return ? ''
`` I do not know what I told her , '' he replied , impatiently ; '' less than was due to the past , beyond a doubt , and in all likelihood much more than was justified by the future .
I can not think of it. -- It wo n't do. -- Then came your dear mother to torture me farther , with all her kindness and confidence .
Thank Heaven !
it DID torture me .
I was miserable .
Miss Dashwood , you can not have an idea of the comfort it gives me to look back on my own misery .
I owe such a grudge to myself for the stupid , rascally folly of my own heart , that all my past sufferings under it are only triumph and exultation to me now .
Well , I went , left all that I loved , and went to those to whom , at best , I was only indifferent .
My journey to town -- travelling with my own horses , and therefore so tediously -- no creature to speak to -- my own reflections so cheerful -- when I looked forward every thing so inviting ! -- when I looked back at Barton , the picture so soothing ! -- oh , it was a blessed journey ! ''
He stopped .
`` Well , sir , '' said Elinor , who , though pitying him , grew impatient for his departure , `` and this is all ? ''
`` Ah ! -- no , -- have you forgot what passed in town ? -- That infamous letter -- Did she shew it you ? ''
`` Yes , I saw every note that passed . ''
`` When the first of hers reached me ( as it immediately did , for I was in town the whole time , ) what I felt is -- in the common phrase , not to be expressed ; in a more simple one -- perhaps too simple to raise any emotion -- my feelings were very , very painful. -- Every line , every word was -- in the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer , were she here , would forbid -- a dagger to my heart .
To know that Marianne was in town was -- in the same language -- a thunderbolt. -- Thunderbolts and daggers ! -- what a reproof would she have given me ! -- her taste , her opinions -- I believe they are better known to me than my own , -- and I am sure they are dearer . ''
Elinor 's heart , which had undergone many changes in the course of this extraordinary conversation , was now softened again ; -- yet she felt it her duty to check such ideas in her companion as the last .
`` This is not right , Mr .
Willoughby. -- Remember that you are married .
Relate only what in your conscience you think necessary for me to hear . ''
`` Marianne 's note , by assuring me that I was still as dear to her as in former days , that in spite of the many , many weeks we had been separated , she was as constant in her own feelings , and as full of faith in the constancy of mine as ever , awakened all my remorse .
I say awakened , because time and London , business and dissipation , had in some measure quieted it , and I had been growing a fine hardened villain , fancying myself indifferent to her , and chusing to fancy that she too must have become indifferent to me ; talking to myself of our past attachment as a mere idle , trifling business , shrugging up my shoulders in proof of its being so , and silencing every reproach , overcoming every scruple , by secretly saying now and then , ' I shall be heartily glad to hear she is well married . '
-- But this note made me know myself better .
I felt that she was infinitely dearer to me than any other woman in the world , and that I was using her infamously .
But every thing was then just settled between Miss Grey and me .
To retreat was impossible .
All that I had to do , was to avoid you both .
I sent no answer to Marianne , intending by that to preserve myself from her farther notice ; and for some time I was even determined not to call in Berkeley Street ; -- but at last , judging it wiser to affect the air of a cool , common acquaintance than anything else , I watched you all safely out of the house one morning , and left my name . ''
`` Watched us out of the house ! ''
`` Even so .
You would be surprised to hear how often I watched you , how often I was on the point of falling in with you .
I have entered many a shop to avoid your sight , as the carriage drove by .
Lodging as I did in Bond Street , there was hardly a day in which I did not catch a glimpse of one or other of you ; and nothing but the most constant watchfulness on my side , a most invariably prevailing desire to keep out of your sight , could have separated us so long .
I avoided the Middletons as much as possible , as well as everybody else who was likely to prove an acquaintance in common .
Not aware of their being in town , however , I blundered on Sir John , I believe , the first day of his coming , and the day after I had called at Mrs .
Jennings 's .
He asked me to a party , a dance at his house in the evening. -- Had he NOT told me as an inducement that you and your sister were to be there , I should have felt it too certain a thing , to trust myself near him .
The next morning brought another short note from Marianne -- still affectionate , open , artless , confiding -- everything that could make MY conduct most hateful .
I could not answer it .
I tried -- but could not frame a sentence .
But I thought of her , I believe , every moment of the day .
If you CAN pity me , Miss Dashwood , pity my situation as it was THEN .
With my head and heart full of your sister , I was forced to play the happy lover to another woman ! -- Those three or four weeks were worse than all .
Well , at last , as I need not tell you , you were forced on me ; and what a sweet figure I cut ! -- what an evening of agony it was ! -- Marianne , beautiful as an angel on one side , calling me Willoughby in such a tone ! -- Oh , God ! -- holding out her hand to me , asking me for an explanation , with those bewitching eyes fixed in such speaking solicitude on my face ! -- and Sophia , jealous as the devil on the other hand , looking all that was -- Well , it does not signify ; it is over now. -- Such an evening ! -- I ran away from you all as soon as I could ; but not before I had seen Marianne 's sweet face as white as death. -- THAT was the last , last look I ever had of her ; -- the last manner in which she appeared to me .
It was a horrid sight ! -- yet when I thought of her to-day as really dying , it was a kind of comfort to me to imagine that I knew exactly how she would appear to those , who saw her last in this world .
She was before me , constantly before me , as I travelled , in the same look and hue . ''
A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeeded .
Willoughby first rousing himself , broke it thus : '' Well , let me make haste and be gone .
Your sister is certainly better , certainly out of danger ? ''
`` We are assured of it . ''
`` Your poor mother , too ! -- doting on Marianne . ''
`` But the letter , Mr .
Willoughby , your own letter ; have you any thing to say about that ? ''
`` Yes , yes , THAT in particular .
Your sister wrote to me again , you know , the very next morning .
You saw what she said .
I was breakfasting at the Ellisons , -- and her letter , with some others , was brought to me there from my lodgings .
It happened to catch Sophia 's eye before it caught mine -- and its size , the elegance of the paper , the hand-writing altogether , immediately gave her a suspicion .
Some vague report had reached her before of my attachment to some young lady in Devonshire , and what had passed within her observation the preceding evening had marked who the young lady was , and made her more jealous than ever .
Affecting that air of playfulness , therefore , which is delightful in a woman one loves , she opened the letter directly , and read its contents .
She was well paid for her impudence .
She read what made her wretched .
Her wretchedness I could have borne , but her passion -- her malice -- At all events it must be appeased .
And , in short -- what do you think of my wife 's style of letter-writing ? -- delicate -- tender -- truly feminine -- was it not ? ''
`` Your wife ! -- The letter was in your own hand-writing . ''
`` Yes , but I had only the credit of servilely copying such sentences as I was ashamed to put my name to .
The original was all her own -- her own happy thoughts and gentle diction .
But what could I do ! -- we were engaged , every thing in preparation , the day almost fixed -- But I am talking like a fool .
Preparation ! -- day ! -- In honest words , her money was necessary to me , and in a situation like mine , any thing was to be done to prevent a rupture .
And after all , what did it signify to my character in the opinion of Marianne and her friends , in what language my answer was couched ? -- It must have been only to one end .
My business was to declare myself a scoundrel , and whether I did it with a bow or a bluster was of little importance. -- ' I am ruined for ever in their opinion -- ' said I to myself -- ' I am shut out for ever from their society , they already think me an unprincipled fellow , this letter will only make them think me a blackguard one . '
Such were my reasonings , as , in a sort of desperate carelessness , I copied my wife 's words , and parted with the last relics of Marianne .
Her three notes -- unluckily they were all in my pocketbook , or I should have denied their existence , and hoarded them for ever -- I was forced to put them up , and could not even kiss them .
And the lock of hair -- that too I had always carried about me in the same pocket-book , which was now searched by Madam with the most ingratiating virulence , -- the dear lock -- all , every memento was torn from me . ''
`` You are very wrong , Mr .
Willoughby , very blamable , '' said Elinor , while her voice , in spite of herself , betrayed her compassionate emotion ; `` you ought not to speak in this way , either of Mrs .
Willoughby or my sister .
You had made your own choice .
It was not forced on you .
Your wife has a claim to your politeness , to your respect , at least .
She must be attached to you , or she would not have married you .
To treat her with unkindness , to speak of her slightingly is no atonement to Marianne -- nor can I suppose it a relief to your own conscience . ''
`` Do not talk to me of my wife , '' said he with a heavy sigh. -- '' She does not deserve your compassion. -- She knew I had no regard for her when we married. -- Well , married we were , and came down to Combe Magna to be happy , and afterwards returned to town to be gay. -- And now do you pity me , Miss Dashwood ? -- or have I said all this to no purpose ? -- Am I -- be it only one degree -- am I less guilty in your opinion than I was before ? -- My intentions were not always wrong .
Have I explained away any part of my guilt ? ''
`` Yes , you have certainly removed something -- a little. -- You have proved yourself , on the whole , less faulty than I had believed you .
You have proved your heart less wicked , much less wicked .
But I hardly know -- the misery that you have inflicted -- I hardly know what could have made it worse . ''
`` Will you repeat to your sister when she is recovered , what I have been telling you ? -- Let me be a little lightened too in her opinion as well as in yours .
You tell me that she has forgiven me already .
Let me be able to fancy that a better knowledge of my heart , and of my present feelings , will draw from her a more spontaneous , more natural , more gentle , less dignified , forgiveness .
Tell her of my misery and my penitence -- tell her that my heart was never inconstant to her , and if you will , that at this moment she is dearer to me than ever . ''
`` I will tell her all that is necessary to what may comparatively be called , your justification .
But you have not explained to me the particular reason of your coming now , nor how you heard of her illness . ''
`` Last night , in Drury Lane lobby , I ran against Sir John Middleton , and when he saw who I was -- for the first time these two months -- he spoke to me. -- That he had cut me ever since my marriage , I had seen without surprise or resentment .
Now , however , his good-natured , honest , stupid soul , full of indignation against me , and concern for your sister , could not resist the temptation of telling me what he knew ought to -- though probably he did not think it WOULD -- vex me horridly .
As bluntly as he could speak it , therefore , he told me that Marianne Dashwood was dying of a putrid fever at Cleveland -- a letter that morning received from Mrs .
Jennings declared her danger most imminent -- the Palmers are all gone off in a fright , & c. -- I was too much shocked to be able to pass myself off as insensible even to the undiscerning Sir John .
His heart was softened in seeing mine suffer ; and so much of his ill-will was done away , that when we parted , he almost shook me by the hand while he reminded me of an old promise about a pointer puppy .
What I felt on hearing that your sister was dying -- and dying too , believing me the greatest villain upon earth , scorning , hating me in her latest moments -- for how could I tell what horrid projects might not have been imputed ?
ONE person I was sure would represent me as capable of any thing -- What I felt was dreadful ! -- My resolution was soon made , and at eight o'clock this morning I was in my carriage .
Now you know all . ''
Elinor made no answer .
Her thoughts were silently fixed on the irreparable injury which too early an independence and its consequent habits of idleness , dissipation , and luxury , had made in the mind , the character , the happiness , of a man who , to every advantage of person and talents , united a disposition naturally open and honest , and a feeling , affectionate temper .
The world had made him extravagant and vain -- Extravagance and vanity had made him cold-hearted and selfish .
Vanity , while seeking its own guilty triumph at the expense of another , had involved him in a real attachment , which extravagance , or at least its offspring , necessity , had required to be sacrificed .
Each faulty propensity in leading him to evil , had led him likewise to punishment .
The attachment , from which against honour , against feeling , against every better interest he had outwardly torn himself , now , when no longer allowable , governed every thought ; and the connection , for the sake of which he had , with little scruple , left her sister to misery , was likely to prove a source of unhappiness to himself of a far more incurable nature .
From a reverie of this kind she was recalled at the end of some minutes by Willoughby , who , rousing himself from a reverie at least equally painful , started up in preparation for going , and said -- '' There is no use in staying here ; I must be off . ''
`` Are you going back to town ? ''
`` No -- to Combe Magna .
I have business there ; from thence to town in a day or two .
Good bye . ''
He held out his hand .
She could not refuse to give him hers 's ; -- he pressed it with affection .
`` And you DO think something better of me than you did ? ''
-- said he , letting it fall , and leaning against the mantel-piece as if forgetting he was to go .
Elinor assured him that she did ; -- that she forgave , pitied , wished him well -- was even interested in his happiness -- and added some gentle counsel as to the behaviour most likely to promote it .
His answer was not very encouraging .
`` As to that , '' said he , `` I must rub through the world as well as I can .
Domestic happiness is out of the question .
If , however , I am allowed to think that you and yours feel an interest in my fate and actions , it may be the means -- it may put me on my guard -- at least , it may be something to live for .
Marianne to be sure is lost to me for ever .
Were I even by any blessed chance at liberty again -- '' Elinor stopped him with a reproof .
`` Well , '' -- he replied -- '' once more good bye .
I shall now go away and live in dread of one event . ''
`` What do you mean ? ''
`` Your sister 's marriage . ''
`` You are very wrong .
She can never be more lost to you than she is now . ''
`` But she will be gained by some one else .
And if that some one should be the very he whom , of all others , I could least bear -- but I will not stay to rob myself of all your compassionate goodwill , by shewing that where I have most injured I can least forgive .
Good bye , -- God bless you ! ''
And with these words , he almost ran out of the room .
CHAPTER 45 Elinor , for some time after he left her , for some time even after the sound of his carriage had died away , remained too much oppressed by a crowd of ideas , widely differing in themselves , but of which sadness was the general result , to think even of her sister .
Willoughby , he , whom only half an hour ago she had abhorred as the most worthless of men , Willoughby , in spite of all his faults , excited a degree of commiseration for the sufferings produced by them , which made her think of him as now separated for ever from her family , with a tenderness , a regret , rather in proportion , as she soon acknowledged within herself -- to his wishes than to his merits .
She felt that his influence over her mind was heightened by circumstances which ought not in reason to have weight ; by that person of uncommon attraction , that open , affectionate , and lively manner which it was no merit to possess ; and by that still ardent love for Marianne , which it was not even innocent to indulge .
But she felt that it was so , long , long before she could feel his influence less .
When at last she returned to the unconscious Marianne , she found her just awaking , refreshed by so long and sweet a sleep to the extent of her hopes .
Elinor 's heart was full .
The past , the present , the future , Willoughby 's visit , Marianne 's safety , and her mother 's expected arrival , threw her altogether into an agitation of spirits which kept off every indication of fatigue , and made her only fearful of betraying herself to her sister .
Short was the time , however , in which that fear could affect her , for within half an hour after Willoughby's leaving the house , she was again called down stairs by the sound of another carriage. -- Eager to save her mother from every unnecessary moment 's horrible suspense , she ran immediately into the hall , and reached the outward door just in time to receive and support her as she entered it .
Mrs .
Dashwood , whose terror as they drew near the house had produced almost the conviction of Marianne's being no more , had no voice to inquire after her , no voice even for Elinor ; but SHE , waiting neither for salutation nor inquiry , instantly gave the joyful relief ; -- and her mother , catching it with all her usual warmth , was in a moment as much overcome by her happiness , as she had been before by her fears .
She was supported into the drawing-room between her daughter and her friend ; -- and there , shedding tears of joy , though still unable to speak , embraced Elinor again and again , turning from her at intervals to press Colonel Brandon 's hand , with a look which spoke at once her gratitude , and her conviction of his sharing with herself in the bliss of the moment .
He shared it , however , in a silence even greater than her own .
As soon as Mrs .
Dashwood had recovered herself , to see Marianne was her first desire ; and in two minutes she was with her beloved child , rendered dearer to her than ever by absence , unhappiness , and danger .
Elinor 's delight , as she saw what each felt in the meeting , was only checked by an apprehension of its robbing Marianne of farther sleep ; -- but Mrs .
Dashwood could be calm , could be even prudent , when the life of a child was at stake , and Marianne , satisfied in knowing her mother was near her , and conscious of being too weak for conversation , submitted readily to the silence and quiet prescribed by every nurse around her .
Mrs .
Dashwood WOULD sit up with her all night ; and Elinor , in compliance with her mother 's entreaty , went to bed .
But the rest , which one night entirely sleepless , and many hours of the most wearing anxiety seemed to make requisite , was kept off by irritation of spirits .
Willoughby , `` poor Willoughby , '' as she now allowed herself to call him , was constantly in her thoughts ; she would not but have heard his vindication for the world , and now blamed , now acquitted herself for having judged him so harshly before .
But her promise of relating it to her sister was invariably painful .
She dreaded the performance of it , dreaded what its effect on Marianne might be ; doubted whether after such an explanation she could ever be happy with another ; and for a moment wished Willoughby a widower .
Then , remembering Colonel Brandon , reproved herself , felt that to HIS sufferings and his constancy far more than to his rival 's , the reward of her sister was due , and wished any thing rather than Mrs .
Willoughby 's death .
The shock of Colonel Brandon 's errand at Barton had been much softened to Mrs .
Dashwood by her own previous alarm ; for so great was her uneasiness about Marianne , that she had already determined to set out for Cleveland on that very day , without waiting for any further intelligence , and had so far settled her journey before his arrival , that the Careys were then expected every moment to fetch Margaret away , as her mother was unwilling to take her where there might be infection .
Marianne continued to mend every day , and the brilliant cheerfulness of Mrs .
Dashwood 's looks and spirits proved her to be , as she repeatedly declared herself , one of the happiest women in the world .
Elinor could not hear the declaration , nor witness its proofs without sometimes wondering whether her mother ever recollected Edward .
But Mrs .
Dashwood , trusting to the temperate account of her own disappointment which Elinor had sent her , was led away by the exuberance of her joy to think only of what would increase it .
Marianne was restored to her from a danger in which , as she now began to feel , her own mistaken judgment in encouraging the unfortunate attachment to Willoughby , had contributed to place her ; -- and in her recovery she had yet another source of joy unthought of by Elinor .
It was thus imparted to her , as soon as any opportunity of private conference between them occurred .
`` At last we are alone .
My Elinor , you do not yet know all my happiness .
Colonel Brandon loves Marianne .
He has told me so himself . ''
Her daughter , feeling by turns both pleased and pained , surprised and not surprised , was all silent attention .
`` You are never like me , dear Elinor , or I should wonder at your composure now .
Had I sat down to wish for any possible good to my family , I should have fixed on Colonel Brandon 's marrying one of you as the object most desirable .
And I believe Marianne will be the most happy with him of the two . ''
Elinor was half inclined to ask her reason for thinking so , because satisfied that none founded on an impartial consideration of their age , characters , or feelings , could be given ; -- but her mother must always be carried away by her imagination on any interesting subject , and therefore instead of an inquiry , she passed it off with a smile .
`` He opened his whole heart to me yesterday as we travelled .
It came out quite unawares , quite undesignedly .
I , you may well believe , could talk of nothing but my child ; -- he could not conceal his distress ; I saw that it equalled my own , and he perhaps , thinking that mere friendship , as the world now goes , would not justify so warm a sympathy -- or rather , not thinking at all , I suppose -- giving way to irresistible feelings , made me acquainted with his earnest , tender , constant , affection for Marianne .
He has loved her , my Elinor , ever since the first moment of seeing her . ''
Here , however , Elinor perceived , -- not the language , not the professions of Colonel Brandon , but the natural embellishments of her mother 's active fancy , which fashioned every thing delightful to her as it chose .
`` His regard for her , infinitely surpassing anything that Willoughby ever felt or feigned , as much more warm , as more sincere or constant -- which ever we are to call it -- has subsisted through all the knowledge of dear Marianne's unhappy prepossession for that worthless young man ! -- and without selfishness -- without encouraging a hope ! -- could he have seen her happy with another -- Such a noble mind ! -- such openness , such sincerity ! -- no one can be deceived in HIM . ''
`` Colonel Brandon 's character , '' said Elinor , '' as an excellent man , is well established . ''
`` I know it is '' -- replied her mother seriously , `` or after such a warning , I should be the last to encourage such affection , or even to be pleased by it .
But his coming for me as he did , with such active , such ready friendship , is enough to prove him one of the worthiest of men . ''
`` His character , however , '' answered Elinor , `` does not rest on ONE act of kindness , to which his affection for Marianne , were humanity out of the case , would have prompted him .
To Mrs .
Jennings , to the Middletons , he has been long and intimately known ; they equally love and respect him ; and even my own knowledge of him , though lately acquired , is very considerable ; and so highly do I value and esteem him , that if Marianne can be happy with him , I shall be as ready as yourself to think our connection the greatest blessing to us in the world .
What answer did you give him ? -- Did you allow him to hope ? ''
`` Oh !
my love , I could not then talk of hope to him or to myself .
Marianne might at that moment be dying .
But he did not ask for hope or encouragement .
His was an involuntary confidence , an irrepressible effusion to a soothing friend -- not an application to a parent .
Yet after a time I DID say , for at first I was quite overcome -- that if she lived , as I trusted she might , my greatest happiness would lie in promoting their marriage ; and since our arrival , since our delightful security , I have repeated it to him more fully , have given him every encouragement in my power .
Time , a very little time , I tell him , will do everything ; -- Marianne 's heart is not to be wasted for ever on such a man as Willoughby. -- His own merits must soon secure it . ''
`` To judge from the Colonel 's spirits , however , you have not yet made him equally sanguine . ''
`` No. -- He thinks Marianne 's affection too deeply rooted for any change in it under a great length of time , and even supposing her heart again free , is too diffident of himself to believe , that with such a difference of age and disposition he could ever attach her .
There , however , he is quite mistaken .
His age is only so much beyond hers as to be an advantage , as to make his character and principles fixed ; -- and his disposition , I am well convinced , is exactly the very one to make your sister happy .
And his person , his manners too , are all in his favour .
My partiality does not blind me ; he certainly is not so handsome as Willoughby -- but at the same time , there is something much more pleasing in his countenance. -- There was always a something , -- if you remember , -- in Willoughby's eyes at times , which I did not like . ''
Elinor could NOT remember it ; -- but her mother , without waiting for her assent , continued , '' And his manners , the Colonel 's manners are not only more pleasing to me than Willoughby 's ever were , but they are of a kind I well know to be more solidly attaching to Marianne .
Their gentleness , their genuine attention to other people , and their manly unstudied simplicity is much more accordant with her real disposition , than the liveliness -- often artificial , and often ill-timed of the other .
I am very sure myself , that had Willoughby turned out as really amiable , as he has proved himself the contrary , Marianne would yet never have been so happy with HIM , as she will be with Colonel Brandon . ''
She paused. -- Her daughter could not quite agree with her , but her dissent was not heard , and therefore gave no offence .
`` At Delaford , she will be within an easy distance of me , '' added Mrs .
Dashwood , `` even if I remain at Barton ; and in all probability , -- for I hear it is a large village , -- indeed there certainly MUST be some small house or cottage close by , that would suit us quite as well as our present situation . ''
Poor Elinor ! -- here was a new scheme for getting her to Delaford ! -- but her spirit was stubborn .
`` His fortune too ! -- for at my time of life you know , everybody cares about THAT ; -- and though I neither know nor desire to know , what it really is , I am sure it must be a good one . ''
Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a third person , and Elinor withdrew to think it all over in private , to wish success to her friend , and yet in wishing it , to feel a pang for Willoughby .
CHAPTER 46 Marianne 's illness , though weakening in its kind , had not been long enough to make her recovery slow ; and with youth , natural strength , and her mother 's presence in aid , it proceeded so smoothly as to enable her to remove , within four days after the arrival of the latter , into Mrs .
Palmer 's dressing-room .
When there , at her own particular request , for she was impatient to pour forth her thanks to him for fetching her mother , Colonel Brandon was invited to visit her .
His emotion on entering the room , in seeing her altered looks , and in receiving the pale hand which she immediately held out to him , was such , as , in Elinor 's conjecture , must arise from something more than his affection for Marianne , or the consciousness of its being known to others ; and she soon discovered in his melancholy eye and varying complexion as he looked at her sister , the probable recurrence of many past scenes of misery to his mind , brought back by that resemblance between Marianne and Eliza already acknowledged , and now strengthened by the hollow eye , the sickly skin , the posture of reclining weakness , and the warm acknowledgment of peculiar obligation .
Mrs .
Dashwood , not less watchful of what passed than her daughter , but with a mind very differently influenced , and therefore watching to very different effect , saw nothing in the Colonel 's behaviour but what arose from the most simple and self-evident sensations , while in the actions and words of Marianne she persuaded herself to think that something more than gratitude already dawned .
At the end of another day or two , Marianne growing visibly stronger every twelve hours , Mrs .
Dashwood , urged equally by her own and her daughter 's wishes , began to talk of removing to Barton .
On HER measures depended those of her two friends ; Mrs .
Jennings could not quit Cleveland during the Dashwoods ' stay ; and Colonel Brandon was soon brought , by their united request , to consider his own abode there as equally determinate , if not equally indispensable .
At his and Mrs .
Jennings's united request in return , Mrs .
Dashwood was prevailed on to accept the use of his carriage on her journey back , for the better accommodation of her sick child ; and the Colonel , at the joint invitation of Mrs .
Dashwood and Mrs .
Jennings , whose active good-nature made her friendly and hospitable for other people as well as herself , engaged with pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the cottage , in the course of a few weeks .
The day of separation and departure arrived ; and Marianne , after taking so particular and lengthened a leave of Mrs .
Jennings , one so earnestly grateful , so full of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to her own heart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention , and bidding Colonel Brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend , was carefully assisted by him into the carriage , of which he seemed anxious that she should engross at least half .
Mrs .
Dashwood and Elinor then followed , and the others were left by themselves , to talk of the travellers , and feel their own dullness , till Mrs .
Jennings was summoned to her chaise to take comfort in the gossip of her maid for the loss of her two young companions ; and Colonel Brandon immediately afterwards took his solitary way to Delaford .
The Dashwoods were two days on the road , and Marianne bore her journey on both , without essential fatigue .
Every thing that the most zealous affection , the most solicitous care could do to render her comfortable , was the office of each watchful companion , and each found their reward in her bodily ease , and her calmness of spirits .
To Elinor , the observation of the latter was particularly grateful .
She , who had seen her week after week so constantly suffering , oppressed by anguish of heart which she had neither courage to speak of , nor fortitude to conceal , now saw with a joy , which no other could equally share , an apparent composure of mind , which , in being the result as she trusted of serious reflection , must eventually lead her to contentment and cheerfulness .
As they approached Barton , indeed , and entered on scenes of which every field and every tree brought some peculiar , some painful recollection , she grew silent and thoughtful , and turning away her face from their notice , sat earnestly gazing through the window .
But here , Elinor could neither wonder nor blame ; and when she saw , as she assisted Marianne from the carriage , that she had been crying , she saw only an emotion too natural in itself to raise any thing less tender than pity , and in its unobtrusiveness entitled to praise .
In the whole of her subsequent manner , she traced the direction of a mind awakened to reasonable exertion ; for no sooner had they entered their common sitting-room , than Marianne turned her eyes around it with a look of resolute firmness , as if determined at once to accustom herself to the sight of every object with which the remembrance of Willoughby could be connected. -- She said little , but every sentence aimed at cheerfulness , and though a sigh sometimes escaped her , it never passed away without the atonement of a smile .
After dinner she would try her piano-forte .
She went to it ; but the music on which her eye first rested was an opera , procured for her by Willoughby , containing some of their favourite duets , and bearing on its outward leaf her own name in his hand-writing. -- That would not do. -- She shook her head , put the music aside , and after running over the keys for a minute , complained of feebleness in her fingers , and closed the instrument again ; declaring however with firmness as she did so , that she should in future practice much .
The next morning produced no abatement in these happy symptoms .
On the contrary , with a mind and body alike strengthened by rest , she looked and spoke with more genuine spirit , anticipating the pleasure of Margaret 's return , and talking of the dear family party which would then be restored , of their mutual pursuits and cheerful society , as the only happiness worth a wish .
`` When the weather is settled , and I have recovered my strength , '' said she , `` we will take long walks together every day .
We will walk to the farm at the edge of the down , and see how the children go on ; we will walk to Sir John's new plantations at Barton Cross , and the Abbeyland ; and we will often go the old ruins of the Priory , and try to trace its foundations as far as we are told they once reached .
I know we shall be happy .
I know the summer will pass happily away .
I mean never to be later in rising than six , and from that time till dinner I shall divide every moment between music and reading .
I have formed my plan , and am determined to enter on a course of serious study .
Our own library is too well known to me , to be resorted to for any thing beyond mere amusement .
But there are many works well worth reading at the Park ; and there are others of more modern production which I know I can borrow of Colonel Brandon .
By reading only six hours a-day , I shall gain in the course of a twelve-month a great deal of instruction which I now feel myself to want . ''
Elinor honoured her for a plan which originated so nobly as this ; though smiling to see the same eager fancy which had been leading her to the extreme of languid indolence and selfish repining , now at work in introducing excess into a scheme of such rational employment and virtuous self-control .
Her smile however changed to a sigh when she remembered that promise to Willoughby was yet unfulfilled , and feared she had that to communicate which might again unsettle the mind of Marianne , and ruin at least for a time this fair prospect of busy tranquillity .
Willing therefore to delay the evil hour , she resolved to wait till her sister 's health were more secure , before she appointed it .
But the resolution was made only to be broken .
Marianne had been two or three days at home , before the weather was fine enough for an invalid like herself to venture out .
But at last a soft , genial morning appeared ; such as might tempt the daughter 's wishes and the mother 's confidence ; and Marianne , leaning on Elinor 's arm , was authorised to walk as long as she could without fatigue , in the lane before the house .
The sisters set out at a pace , slow as the feebleness of Marianne in an exercise hitherto untried since her illness required ; -- and they had advanced only so far beyond the house as to admit a full view of the hill , the important hill behind , when pausing with her eyes turned towards it , Marianne calmly said , '' There , exactly there , '' -- pointing with one hand , '' on that projecting mound , -- there I fell ; and there I first saw Willoughby . ''
Her voice sunk with the word , but presently reviving she added , '' I am thankful to find that I can look with so little pain on the spot ! -- shall we ever talk on that subject , Elinor ? ''
-- hesitatingly it was said. -- '' Or will it be wrong ? -- I can talk of it now , I hope , as I ought to do . ''
-- Elinor tenderly invited her to be open .
`` As for regret , '' said Marianne , `` I have done with that , as far as HE is concerned .
I do not mean to talk to you of what my feelings have been for him , but what they are NOW. -- At present , if I could be satisfied on one point , if I could be allowed to think that he was not ALWAYS acting a part , not ALWAYS deceiving me ; -- but above all , if I could be assured that he never was so VERY wicked as my fears have sometimes fancied him , since the story of that unfortunate girl '' -- She stopt .
Elinor joyfully treasured her words as she answered , '' If you could be assured of that , you think you should be easy . ''
`` Yes .
My peace of mind is doubly involved in it ; -- for not only is it horrible to suspect a person , who has been what HE has been to ME , of such designs , -- but what must it make me appear to myself ? -- What in a situation like mine , but a most shamefully unguarded affection could expose me to '' -- '' How then , '' asked her sister , `` would you account for his behaviour ? ''
`` I would suppose him , -- Oh , how gladly would I suppose him , only fickle , very , very fickle . ''
Elinor said no more .
She was debating within herself on the eligibility of beginning her story directly , or postponing it till Marianne were in stronger health ; -- and they crept on for a few minutes in silence .
`` I am not wishing him too much good , '' said Marianne at last with a sigh , `` when I wish his secret reflections may be no more unpleasant than my own .
He will suffer enough in them . ''
`` Do you compare your conduct with his ? ''
`` No .
I compare it with what it ought to have been ; I compare it with yours . ''
`` Our situations have borne little resemblance . ''
`` They have borne more than our conduct. -- Do not , my dearest Elinor , let your kindness defend what I know your judgment must censure .
My illness has made me think -- It has given me leisure and calmness for serious recollection .
Long before I was enough recovered to talk , I was perfectly able to reflect .
I considered the past : I saw in my own behaviour , since the beginning of our acquaintance with him last autumn , nothing but a series of imprudence towards myself , and want of kindness to others .
I saw that my own feelings had prepared my sufferings , and that my want of fortitude under them had almost led me to the grave .
My illness , I well knew , had been entirely brought on by myself by such negligence of my own health , as I had felt even at the time to be wrong .
Had I died , -- it would have been self-destruction .
I did not know my danger till the danger was removed ; but with such feelings as these reflections gave me , I wonder at my recovery , -- wonder that the very eagerness of my desire to live , to have time for atonement to my God , and to you all , did not kill me at once .
Had I died , -- in what peculiar misery should I have left you , my nurse , my friend , my sister ! -- You , who had seen all the fretful selfishness of my latter days ; who had known all the murmurings of my heart ! -- How should I have lived in YOUR remembrance ! -- My mother too !
How could you have consoled her ! -- I can not express my own abhorrence of myself .
Whenever I looked towards the past , I saw some duty neglected , or some failing indulged .
Every body seemed injured by me .
The kindness , the unceasing kindness of Mrs .
Jennings , I had repaid with ungrateful contempt .
To the Middletons , to the Palmers , the Steeles , to every common acquaintance even , I had been insolent and unjust ; with a heart hardened against their merits , and a temper irritated by their very attention. -- To John , to Fanny , -- yes , even to them , little as they deserve , I had given less than their due .
But you , -- you above all , above my mother , had been wronged by me .
I , and only I , knew your heart and its sorrows ; yet to what did it influence me ? -- not to any compassion that could benefit you or myself. -- Your example was before me ; but to what avail ? -- Was I more considerate of you and your comfort ?
Did I imitate your forbearance , or lessen your restraints , by taking any part in those offices of general complaisance or particular gratitude which you had hitherto been left to discharge alone ? -- No ; -- not less when I knew you to be unhappy , than when I had believed you at ease , did I turn away from every exertion of duty or friendship ; scarcely allowing sorrow to exist but with me , regretting only THAT heart which had deserted and wronged me , and leaving you , for or I professed an unbounded affection , to be miserable for my sake . ''
Here ceased the rapid flow of her self-reproving spirit ; and Elinor , impatient to soothe , though too honest to flatter , gave her instantly that praise and support which her frankness and her contrition so well deserved .
Marianne pressed her hand and replied , '' You are very good. -- The future must be my proof .
I have laid down my plan , and if I am capable of adhering to it -- my feelings shall be governed and my temper improved .
They shall no longer worry others , nor torture myself .
I shall now live solely for my family .
You , my mother , and Margaret , must henceforth be all the world to me ; you will share my affections entirely between you .
> From you , from my home , I shall never again have the smallest incitement to move ; and if I do mix in other society , it will be only to shew that my spirit is humbled , my heart amended , and that I can practise the civilities , the lesser duties of life , with gentleness and forbearance .
As for Willoughby -- to say that I shall soon or that I shall ever forget him , would be idle .
His remembrance can be overcome by no change of circumstances or opinions .
But it shall be regulated , it shall be checked by religion , by reason , by constant employment . ''
She paused -- and added in a low voice , `` If I could but know HIS heart , everything would become easy . ''
Elinor , who had now been for some time reflecting on the propriety or impropriety of speedily hazarding her narration , without feeling at all nearer decision than at first , heard this ; and perceiving that as reflection did nothing , resolution must do all , soon found herself leading to the fact .
She managed the recital , as she hoped , with address ; prepared her anxious listener with caution ; related simply and honestly the chief points on which Willoughby grounded his apology ; did justice to his repentance , and softened only his protestations of present regard .
Marianne said not a word. -- She trembled , her eyes were fixed on the ground , and her lips became whiter than even sickness had left them .
A thousand inquiries sprung up from her heart , but she dared not urge one .
She caught every syllable with panting eagerness ; her hand , unknowingly to herself , closely pressed her sister 's , and tears covered her cheeks .
Elinor , dreading her being tired , led her towards home ; and till they reached the door of the cottage , easily conjecturing what her curiosity must be though no question was suffered to speak it , talked of nothing but Willoughby , and their conversation together ; and was carefully minute in every particular of speech and look , where minuteness could be safely indulged .
As soon as they entered the house , Marianne with a kiss of gratitude and these two words just articulate through her tears , `` Tell mama , '' withdrew from her sister and walked slowly up stairs .
Elinor would not attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonable as what she now sought ; and with a mind anxiously pre-arranging its result , and a resolution of reviving the subject again , should Marianne fail to do it , she turned into the parlour to fulfill her parting injunction .
CHAPTER 47 Mrs .
Dashwood did not hear unmoved the vindication of her former favourite .
She rejoiced in his being cleared from some part of his imputed guilt ; -- she was sorry for him ; -- she wished him happy .
But the feelings of the past could not be recalled. -- Nothing could restore him with a faith unbroken -- a character unblemished , to Marianne .
Nothing could do away the knowledge of what the latter had suffered through his means , nor remove the guilt of his conduct towards Eliza .
Nothing could replace him , therefore , in her former esteem , nor injure the interests of Colonel Brandon .
Had Mrs .
Dashwood , like her daughter , heard Willoughby's story from himself -- had she witnessed his distress , and been under the influence of his countenance and his manner , it is probable that her compassion would have been greater .
But it was neither in Elinor 's power , nor in her wish , to rouse such feelings in another , by her retailed explanation , as had at first been called forth in herself .
Reflection had given calmness to her judgment , and sobered her own opinion of Willoughby 's deserts ; -- she wished , therefore , to declare only the simple truth , and lay open such facts as were really due to his character , without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancy astray .
In the evening , when they were all three together , Marianne began voluntarily to speak of him again ; -- but that it was not without an effort , the restless , unquiet thoughtfulness in which she had been for some time previously sitting -- her rising colour , as she spoke , -- and her unsteady voice , plainly shewed .
`` I wish to assure you both , '' said she , `` that I see every thing -- as you can desire me to do . ''
Mrs .
Dashwood would have interrupted her instantly with soothing tenderness , had not Elinor , who really wished to hear her sister 's unbiased opinion , by an eager sign , engaged her silence .
Marianne slowly continued -- '' It is a great relief to me -- what Elinor told me this morning -- I have now heard exactly what I wished to hear . ''
-- For some moments her voice was lost ; but recovering herself , she added , and with greater calmness than before -- '' I am now perfectly satisfied , I wish for no change .
I never could have been happy with him , after knowing , as sooner or later I must have known , all this. -- I should have had no confidence , no esteem .
Nothing could have done it away to my feelings . ''
`` I know it -- I know it , '' cried her mother .
`` Happy with a man of libertine practices ! -- With one who so injured the peace of the dearest of our friends , and the best of men ! -- No -- my Marianne has not a heart to be made happy with such a man ! -- Her conscience , her sensitive conscience , would have felt all that the conscience of her husband ought to have felt . ''
Marianne sighed , and repeated , `` I wish for no change . ''
`` You consider the matter , '' said Elinor , `` exactly as a good mind and a sound understanding must consider it ; and I dare say you perceive , as well as myself , not only in this , but in many other circumstances , reason enough to be convinced that your marriage must have involved you in many certain troubles and disappointments , in which you would have been poorly supported by an affection , on his side , much less certain .
Had you married , you must have been always poor .
His expensiveness is acknowledged even by himself , and his whole conduct declares that self-denial is a word hardly understood by him .
His demands and your inexperience together , on a small , very small income , must have brought on distresses which would not be the LESS grievous to you , from having been entirely unknown and unthought of before .
YOUR sense of honour and honesty would have led you , I know , when aware of your situation , to attempt all the economy that would appear to you possible : and , perhaps , as long as your frugality retrenched only on your own comfort , you might have been suffered to practice it , but beyond that -- and how little could the utmost of your single management do to stop the ruin which had begun before your marriage ? -- Beyond THAT , had you endeavoured , however reasonably , to abridge HIS enjoyments , is it not to be feared , that instead of prevailing on feelings so selfish to consent to it , you would have lessened your own influence on his heart , and made him regret the connection which had involved him in such difficulties ? ''
Marianne 's lips quivered , and she repeated the word '' Selfish ? ''
in a tone that implied -- '' do you really think him selfish ? ''
`` The whole of his behaviour , '' replied Elinor , '' from the beginning to the end of the affair , has been grounded on selfishness .
It was selfishness which first made him sport with your affections ; which afterwards , when his own were engaged , made him delay the confession of it , and which finally carried him from Barton .
His own enjoyment , or his own ease , was , in every particular , his ruling principle . ''
`` It is very true .
MY happiness never was his object . ''
`` At present , '' continued Elinor , `` he regrets what he has done .
And why does he regret it ? -- Because he finds it has not answered towards himself .
It has not made him happy .
His circumstances are now unembarrassed -- he suffers from no evil of that kind ; and he thinks only that he has married a woman of a less amiable temper than yourself .
But does it follow that had he married you , he would have been happy ? -- The inconveniences would have been different .
He would then have suffered under the pecuniary distresses which , because they are removed , he now reckons as nothing .
He would have had a wife of whose temper he could make no complaint , but he would have been always necessitous -- always poor ; and probably would soon have learned to rank the innumerable comforts of a clear estate and good income as of far more importance , even to domestic happiness , than the mere temper of a wife . ''
`` I have not a doubt of it , '' said Marianne ; `` and I have nothing to regret -- nothing but my own folly . ''
`` Rather say your mother 's imprudence , my child , '' said Mrs .
Dashwood ; `` SHE must be answerable . ''
Marianne would not let her proceed ; -- and Elinor , satisfied that each felt their own error , wished to avoid any survey of the past that might weaken her sister's spirits ; she , therefore , pursuing the first subject , immediately continued , '' One observation may , I think , be fairly drawn from the whole of the story -- that all Willoughby 's difficulties have arisen from the first offence against virtue , in his behaviour to Eliza Williams .
That crime has been the origin of every lesser one , and of all his present discontents . ''
Marianne assented most feelingly to the remark ; and her mother was led by it to an enumeration of Colonel Brandon 's injuries and merits , warm as friendship and design could unitedly dictate .
Her daughter did not look , however , as if much of it were heard by her .
Elinor , according to her expectation , saw on the two or three following days , that Marianne did not continue to gain strength as she had done ; but while her resolution was unsubdued , and she still tried to appear cheerful and easy , her sister could safely trust to the effect of time upon her health .
Margaret returned , and the family were again all restored to each other , again quietly settled at the cottage ; and if not pursuing their usual studies with quite so much vigour as when they first came to Barton , at least planning a vigorous prosecution of them in future .
Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward .
She had heard nothing of him since her leaving London , nothing new of his plans , nothing certain even of his present abode .
Some letters had passed between her and her brother , in consequence of Marianne 's illness ; and in the first of John 's , there had been this sentence : -- '' We know nothing of our unfortunate Edward , and can make no enquiries on so prohibited a subject , but conclude him to be still at Oxford ; '' which was all the intelligence of Edward afforded her by the correspondence , for his name was not even mentioned in any of the succeeding letters .
She was not doomed , however , to be long in ignorance of his measures .
Their man-servant had been sent one morning to Exeter on business ; and when , as he waited at table , he had satisfied the inquiries of his mistress as to the event of his errand , this was his voluntary communication -- '' I suppose you know , ma'am , that Mr .
Ferrars is married . ''
Marianne gave a violent start , fixed her eyes upon Elinor , saw her turning pale , and fell back in her chair in hysterics .
Mrs .
Dashwood , whose eyes , as she answered the servant 's inquiry , had intuitively taken the same direction , was shocked to perceive by Elinor's countenance how much she really suffered , and a moment afterwards , alike distressed by Marianne 's situation , knew not on which child to bestow her principal attention .
The servant , who saw only that Miss Marianne was taken ill , had sense enough to call one of the maids , who , with Mrs .
Dashwood 's assistance , supported her into the other room .
By that time , Marianne was rather better , and her mother leaving her to the care of Margaret and the maid , returned to Elinor , who , though still much disordered , had so far recovered the use of her reason and voice as to be just beginning an inquiry of Thomas , as to the source of his intelligence .
Mrs .
Dashwood immediately took all that trouble on herself ; and Elinor had the benefit of the information without the exertion of seeking it .
`` Who told you that Mr .
Ferrars was married , Thomas ? ''
`` I see Mr .
Ferrars myself , ma'am , this morning in Exeter , and his lady too , Miss Steele as was .
They was stopping in a chaise at the door of the New London Inn , as I went there with a message from Sally at the Park to her brother , who is one of the post-boys .
I happened to look up as I went by the chaise , and so I see directly it was the youngest Miss Steele ; so I took off my hat , and she knew me and called to me , and inquired after you , ma'am , and the young ladies , especially Miss Marianne , and bid me I should give her compliments and Mr .
Ferrars 's , their best compliments and service , and how sorry they was they had not time to come on and see you , but they was in a great hurry to go forwards , for they was going further down for a little while , but howsever , when they come back , they 'd make sure to come and see you . ''
`` But did she tell you she was married , Thomas ? ''
`` Yes , ma'am .
She smiled , and said how she had changed her name since she was in these parts .
She was always a very affable and free-spoken young lady , and very civil behaved .
So , I made free to wish her joy . ''
`` Was Mr .
Ferrars in the carriage with her ? ''
`` Yes , ma'am , I just see him leaning back in it , but he did not look up ; -- he never was a gentleman much for talking . ''
Elinor 's heart could easily account for his not putting himself forward ; and Mrs .
Dashwood probably found the same explanation .
`` Was there no one else in the carriage ? ''
`` No , ma'am , only they two . ''
`` Do you know where they came from ? ''
`` They come straight from town , as Miss Lucy -- Mrs .
Ferrars told me . ''
`` And are they going farther westward ? ''
`` Yes , ma'am -- but not to bide long .
They will soon be back again , and then they 'd be sure and call here . ''
Mrs .
Dashwood now looked at her daughter ; but Elinor knew better than to expect them .
She recognised the whole of Lucy in the message , and was very confident that Edward would never come near them .
She observed in a low voice , to her mother , that they were probably going down to Mr .
Pratt 's , near Plymouth .
Thomas 's intelligence seemed over .
Elinor looked as if she wished to hear more .
`` Did you see them off , before you came away ? ''
`` No , ma'am -- the horses were just coming out , but I could not bide any longer ; I was afraid of being late . ''
`` Did Mrs .
Ferrars look well ? ''
`` Yes , ma'am , she said how she was very well ; and to my mind she was always a very handsome young lady -- and she seemed vastly contented . ''
Mrs .
Dashwood could think of no other question , and Thomas and the tablecloth , now alike needless , were soon afterwards dismissed .
Marianne had already sent to say , that she should eat nothing more .
Mrs .
Dashwood's and Elinor 's appetites were equally lost , and Margaret might think herself very well off , that with so much uneasiness as both her sisters had lately experienced , so much reason as they had often had to be careless of their meals , she had never been obliged to go without her dinner before .
When the dessert and the wine were arranged , and Mrs .
Dashwood and Elinor were left by themselves , they remained long together in a similarity of thoughtfulness and silence .
Mrs .
Dashwood feared to hazard any remark , and ventured not to offer consolation .
She now found that she had erred in relying on Elinor 's representation of herself ; and justly concluded that every thing had been expressly softened at the time , to spare her from an increase of unhappiness , suffering as she then had suffered for Marianne .
She found that she had been misled by the careful , the considerate attention of her daughter , to think the attachment , which once she had so well understood , much slighter in reality , than she had been wont to believe , or than it was now proved to be .
She feared that under this persuasion she had been unjust , inattentive , nay , almost unkind , to her Elinor ; -- that Marianne 's affliction , because more acknowledged , more immediately before her , had too much engrossed her tenderness , and led her away to forget that in Elinor she might have a daughter suffering almost as much , certainly with less self-provocation , and greater fortitude .
CHAPTER 48 Elinor now found the difference between the expectation of an unpleasant event , however certain the mind may be told to consider it , and certainty itself .
She now found , that in spite of herself , she had always admitted a hope , while Edward remained single , that something would occur to prevent his marrying Lucy ; that some resolution of his own , some mediation of friends , or some more eligible opportunity of establishment for the lady , would arise to assist the happiness of all .
But he was now married ; and she condemned her heart for the lurking flattery , which so much heightened the pain of the intelligence .
That he should be married soon , before ( as she imagined ) he could be in orders , and consequently before he could be in possession of the living , surprised her a little at first .
But she soon saw how likely it was that Lucy , in her self-provident care , in her haste to secure him , should overlook every thing but the risk of delay .
They were married , married in town , and now hastening down to her uncle 's .
What had Edward felt on being within four miles from Barton , on seeing her mother 's servant , on hearing Lucy 's message !
They would soon , she supposed , be settled at Delaford. -- Delaford , -- that place in which so much conspired to give her an interest ; which she wished to be acquainted with , and yet desired to avoid .
She saw them in an instant in their parsonage-house ; saw in Lucy , the active , contriving manager , uniting at once a desire of smart appearance with the utmost frugality , and ashamed to be suspected of half her economical practices ; -- pursuing her own interest in every thought , courting the favour of Colonel Brandon , of Mrs .
Jennings , and of every wealthy friend .
In Edward -- she knew not what she saw , nor what she wished to see ; -- happy or unhappy , -- nothing pleased her ; she turned away her head from every sketch of him .
Elinor flattered herself that some one of their connections in London would write to them to announce the event , and give farther particulars , -- but day after day passed off , and brought no letter , no tidings .
Though uncertain that any one were to blame , she found fault with every absent friend .
They were all thoughtless or indolent .
`` When do you write to Colonel Brandon , ma'am ? ''
was an inquiry which sprung from the impatience of her mind to have something going on .
`` I wrote to him , my love , last week , and rather expect to see , than to hear from him again .
I earnestly pressed his coming to us , and should not be surprised to see him walk in today or tomorrow , or any day . ''
This was gaining something , something to look forward to .
Colonel Brandon must have some information to give .
Scarcely had she so determined it , when the figure of a man on horseback drew her eyes to the window .
He stopt at their gate .
It was a gentleman , it was Colonel Brandon himself .
Now she could hear more ; and she trembled in expectation of it .
But -- it was NOT Colonel Brandon -- neither his air -- nor his height .
Were it possible , she must say it must be Edward .
She looked again .
He had just dismounted ; -- she could not be mistaken , -- it WAS Edward .
She moved away and sat down .
`` He comes from Mr .
Pratt 's purposely to see us .
I WILL be calm ; I WILL be mistress of myself . ''
In a moment she perceived that the others were likewise aware of the mistake .
She saw her mother and Marianne change colour ; saw them look at herself , and whisper a few sentences to each other .
She would have given the world to be able to speak -- and to make them understand that she hoped no coolness , no slight , would appear in their behaviour to him ; -- but she had no utterance , and was obliged to leave all to their own discretion .
Not a syllable passed aloud .
They all waited in silence for the appearance of their visitor .
His footsteps were heard along the gravel path ; in a moment he was in the passage , and in another he was before them .
His countenance , as he entered the room , was not too happy , even for Elinor .
His complexion was white with agitation , and he looked as if fearful of his reception , and conscious that he merited no kind one .
Mrs .
Dashwood , however , conforming , as she trusted , to the wishes of that daughter , by whom she then meant in the warmth of her heart to be guided in every thing , met with a look of forced complacency , gave him her hand , and wished him joy .
He coloured , and stammered out an unintelligible reply .
Elinor 's lips had moved with her mother 's , and , when the moment of action was over , she wished that she had shaken hands with him too .
But it was then too late , and with a countenance meaning to be open , she sat down again and talked of the weather .
Marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sight , to conceal her distress ; and Margaret , understanding some part , but not the whole of the case , thought it incumbent on her to be dignified , and therefore took a seat as far from him as she could , and maintained a strict silence .
When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of the season , a very awful pause took place .
It was put an end to by Mrs .
Dashwood , who felt obliged to hope that he had left Mrs .
Ferrars very well .
In a hurried manner , he replied in the affirmative .
Another pause .
Elinor resolving to exert herself , though fearing the sound of her own voice , now said , '' Is Mrs .
Ferrars at Longstaple ? ''
`` At Longstaple ! ''
he replied , with an air of surprise. -- '' No , my mother is in town . ''
`` I meant , '' said Elinor , taking up some work from the table , `` to inquire for Mrs .
EDWARD Ferrars . ''
She dared not look up ; -- but her mother and Marianne both turned their eyes on him .
He coloured , seemed perplexed , looked doubtingly , and , after some hesitation , said , -- '' Perhaps you mean -- my brother -- you mean Mrs. -- Mrs .
ROBERT Ferrars . ''
`` Mrs .
Robert Ferrars ! ''
-- was repeated by Marianne and her mother in an accent of the utmost amazement ; -- and though Elinor could not speak , even HER eyes were fixed on him with the same impatient wonder .
He rose from his seat , and walked to the window , apparently from not knowing what to do ; took up a pair of scissors that lay there , and while spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting the latter to pieces as he spoke , said , in a hurried voice , '' Perhaps you do not know -- you may not have heard that my brother is lately married to -- to the youngest -- to Miss Lucy Steele . ''
His words were echoed with unspeakable astonishment by all but Elinor , who sat with her head leaning over her work , in a state of such agitation as made her hardly know where she was .
`` Yes , '' said he , `` they were married last week , and are now at Dawlish . ''
Elinor could sit it no longer .
She almost ran out of the room , and as soon as the door was closed , burst into tears of joy , which at first she thought would never cease .
Edward , who had till then looked any where , rather than at her , saw her hurry away , and perhaps saw -- or even heard , her emotion ; for immediately afterwards he fell into a reverie , which no remarks , no inquiries , no affectionate address of Mrs .
Dashwood could penetrate , and at last , without saying a word , quitted the room , and walked out towards the village -- leaving the others in the greatest astonishment and perplexity on a change in his situation , so wonderful and so sudden ; -- a perplexity which they had no means of lessening but by their own conjectures .
CHAPTER 49 Unaccountable , however , as the circumstances of his release might appear to the whole family , it was certain that Edward was free ; and to what purpose that freedom would be employed was easily pre-determined by all ; -- for after experiencing the blessings of ONE imprudent engagement , contracted without his mother 's consent , as he had already done for more than four years , nothing less could be expected of him in the failure of THAT , than the immediate contraction of another .
His errand at Barton , in fact , was a simple one .
It was only to ask Elinor to marry him ; -- and considering that he was not altogether inexperienced in such a question , it might be strange that he should feel so uncomfortable in the present case as he really did , so much in need of encouragement and fresh air .
How soon he had walked himself into the proper resolution , however , how soon an opportunity of exercising it occurred , in what manner he expressed himself , and how he was received , need not be particularly told .
This only need be said ; -- that when they all sat down to table at four o'clock , about three hours after his arrival , he had secured his lady , engaged her mother 's consent , and was not only in the rapturous profession of the lover , but , in the reality of reason and truth , one of the happiest of men .
His situation indeed was more than commonly joyful .
He had more than the ordinary triumph of accepted love to swell his heart , and raise his spirits .
He was released without any reproach to himself , from an entanglement which had long formed his misery , from a woman whom he had long ceased to love ; -- and elevated at once to that security with another , which he must have thought of almost with despair , as soon as he had learnt to consider it with desire .
He was brought , not from doubt or suspense , but from misery to happiness ; -- and the change was openly spoken in such a genuine , flowing , grateful cheerfulness , as his friends had never witnessed in him before .
His heart was now open to Elinor , all its weaknesses , all its errors confessed , and his first boyish attachment to Lucy treated with all the philosophic dignity of twenty-four .
`` It was a foolish , idle inclination on my side , '' said he , `` the consequence of ignorance of the world -- and want of employment .
Had my brother given me some active profession when I was removed at eighteen from the care of Mr .
Pratt , I think -- nay , I am sure , it would never have happened ; for though I left Longstaple with what I thought , at the time , a most unconquerable preference for his niece , yet had I then had any pursuit , any object to engage my time and keep me at a distance from her for a few months , I should very soon have outgrown the fancied attachment , especially by mixing more with the world , as in such case I must have done .
But instead of having any thing to do , instead of having any profession chosen for me , or being allowed to chuse any myself , I returned home to be completely idle ; and for the first twelvemonth afterwards I had not even the nominal employment , which belonging to the university would have given me ; for I was not entered at Oxford till I was nineteen .
I had therefore nothing in the world to do , but to fancy myself in love ; and as my mother did not make my home in every respect comfortable , as I had no friend , no companion in my brother , and disliked new acquaintance , it was not unnatural for me to be very often at Longstaple , where I always felt myself at home , and was always sure of a welcome ; and accordingly I spent the greatest part of my time there from eighteen to nineteen : Lucy appeared everything that was amiable and obliging .
She was pretty too -- at least I thought so THEN ; and I had seen so little of other women , that I could make no comparisons , and see no defects .
Considering everything , therefore , I hope , foolish as our engagement was , foolish as it has since in every way been proved , it was not at the time an unnatural or an inexcusable piece of folly . ''
The change which a few hours had wrought in the minds and the happiness of the Dashwoods , was such -- so great -- as promised them all , the satisfaction of a sleepless night .
Mrs .
Dashwood , too happy to be comfortable , knew not how to love Edward , nor praise Elinor enough , how to be enough thankful for his release without wounding his delicacy , nor how at once to give them leisure for unrestrained conversation together , and yet enjoy , as she wished , the sight and society of both .
Marianne could speak HER happiness only by tears .
Comparisons would occur -- regrets would arise ; -- and her joy , though sincere as her love for her sister , was of a kind to give her neither spirits nor language .
But Elinor -- how are HER feelings to be described ? -- From the moment of learning that Lucy was married to another , that Edward was free , to the moment of his justifying the hopes which had so instantly followed , she was every thing by turns but tranquil .
But when the second moment had passed , when she found every doubt , every solicitude removed , compared her situation with what so lately it had been , -- saw him honourably released from his former engagement , saw him instantly profiting by the release , to address herself and declare an affection as tender , as constant as she had ever supposed it to be , -- she was oppressed , she was overcome by her own felicity ; -- and happily disposed as is the human mind to be easily familiarized with any change for the better , it required several hours to give sedateness to her spirits , or any degree of tranquillity to her heart .
Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least for a week ; -- for whatever other claims might be made on him , it was impossible that less than a week should be given up to the enjoyment of Elinor 's company , or suffice to say half that was to be said of the past , the present , and the future ; -- for though a very few hours spent in the hard labor of incessant talking will despatch more subjects than can really be in common between any two rational creatures , yet with lovers it is different .
Between THEM no subject is finished , no communication is even made , till it has been made at least twenty times over .
Lucy 's marriage , the unceasing and reasonable wonder among them all , formed of course one of the earliest discussions of the lovers ; -- and Elinor 's particular knowledge of each party made it appear to her in every view , as one of the most extraordinary and unaccountable circumstances she had ever heard .
How they could be thrown together , and by what attraction Robert could be drawn on to marry a girl , of whose beauty she had herself heard him speak without any admiration , -- a girl too already engaged to his brother , and on whose account that brother had been thrown off by his family -- it was beyond her comprehension to make out .
To her own heart it was a delightful affair , to her imagination it was even a ridiculous one , but to her reason , her judgment , it was completely a puzzle .
Edward could only attempt an explanation by supposing , that , perhaps , at first accidentally meeting , the vanity of the one had been so worked on by the flattery of the other , as to lead by degrees to all the rest .
Elinor remembered what Robert had told her in Harley Street , of his opinion of what his own mediation in his brother's affairs might have done , if applied to in time .
She repeated it to Edward .
`` THAT was exactly like Robert , '' -- was his immediate observation. -- '' And THAT , '' he presently added , `` might perhaps be in HIS head when the acquaintance between them first began .
And Lucy perhaps at first might think only of procuring his good offices in my favour .
Other designs might afterward arise . ''
How long it had been carrying on between them , however , he was equally at a loss with herself to make out ; for at Oxford , where he had remained for choice ever since his quitting London , he had had no means of hearing of her but from herself , and her letters to the very last were neither less frequent , nor less affectionate than usual .
Not the smallest suspicion , therefore , had ever occurred to prepare him for what followed ; -- and when at last it burst on him in a letter from Lucy herself , he had been for some time , he believed , half stupified between the wonder , the horror , and the joy of such a deliverance .
He put the letter into Elinor 's hands .
`` DEAR SIR , `` Being very sure I have long lost your affections , I have thought myself at liberty to bestow my own on another , and have no doubt of being as happy with him as I once used to think I might be with you ; but I scorn to accept a hand while the heart was another 's .
Sincerely wish you happy in your choice , and it shall not be my fault if we are not always good friends , as our near relationship now makes proper .
I can safely say I owe you no ill-will , and am sure you will be too generous to do us any ill offices .
Your brother has gained my affections entirely , and as we could not live without one another , we are just returned from the altar , and are now on our way to Dawlish for a few weeks , which place your dear brother has great curiosity to see , but thought I would first trouble you with these few lines , and shall always remain , `` Your sincere well-wisher , friend , and sister , `` LUCY FERRARS .
`` I have burnt all your letters , and will return your picture the first opportunity .
Please to destroy my scrawls -- but the ring with my hair you are very welcome to keep . ''
Elinor read and returned it without any comment .
`` I will not ask your opinion of it as a composition , '' said Edward. -- '' For worlds would not I have had a letter of hers seen by YOU in former days. -- In a sister it is bad enough , but in a wife ! -- how I have blushed over the pages of her writing ! -- and I believe I may say that since the first half year of our foolish -- business -- this is the only letter I ever received from her , of which the substance made me any amends for the defect of the style . ''
`` However it may have come about , '' said Elinor , after a pause , -- '' they are certainly married .
And your mother has brought on herself a most appropriate punishment .
The independence she settled on Robert , through resentment against you , has put it in his power to make his own choice ; and she has actually been bribing one son with a thousand a-year , to do the very deed which she disinherited the other for intending to do .
She will hardly be less hurt , I suppose , by Robert 's marrying Lucy , than she would have been by your marrying her . ''
`` She will be more hurt by it , for Robert always was her favourite. -- She will be more hurt by it , and on the same principle will forgive him much sooner . ''
In what state the affair stood at present between them , Edward knew not , for no communication with any of his family had yet been attempted by him .
He had quitted Oxford within four and twenty hours after Lucy 's letter arrived , and with only one object before him , the nearest road to Barton , had had no leisure to form any scheme of conduct , with which that road did not hold the most intimate connection .
He could do nothing till he were assured of his fate with Miss Dashwood ; and by his rapidity in seeking THAT fate , it is to be supposed , in spite of the jealousy with which he had once thought of Colonel Brandon , in spite of the modesty with which he rated his own deserts , and the politeness with which he talked of his doubts , he did not , upon the whole , expect a very cruel reception .
It was his business , however , to say that he DID , and he said it very prettily .
What he might say on the subject a twelvemonth after , must be referred to the imagination of husbands and wives .
That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive , to go off with a flourish of malice against him in her message by Thomas , was perfectly clear to Elinor ; and Edward himself , now thoroughly enlightened on her character , had no scruple in believing her capable of the utmost meanness of wanton ill-nature .
Though his eyes had been long opened , even before his acquaintance with Elinor began , to her ignorance and a want of liberality in some of her opinions -- they had been equally imputed , by him , to her want of education ; and till her last letter reached him , he had always believed her to be a well-disposed , good-hearted girl , and thoroughly attached to himself .
Nothing but such a persuasion could have prevented his putting an end to an engagement , which , long before the discovery of it laid him open to his mother 's anger , had been a continual source of disquiet and regret to him .
`` I thought it my duty , '' said he , `` independent of my feelings , to give her the option of continuing the engagement or not , when I was renounced by my mother , and stood to all appearance without a friend in the world to assist me .
In such a situation as that , where there seemed nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any living creature , how could I suppose , when she so earnestly , so warmly insisted on sharing my fate , whatever it might be , that any thing but the most disinterested affection was her inducement ?
And even now , I can not comprehend on what motive she acted , or what fancied advantage it could be to her , to be fettered to a man for whom she had not the smallest regard , and who had only two thousand pounds in the world .
She could not foresee that Colonel Brandon would give me a living . ''
`` No ; but she might suppose that something would occur in your favour ; that your own family might in time relent .
And at any rate , she lost nothing by continuing the engagement , for she has proved that it fettered neither her inclination nor her actions .
The connection was certainly a respectable one , and probably gained her consideration among her friends ; and , if nothing more advantageous occurred , it would be better for her to marry YOU than be single . ''
Edward was , of course , immediately convinced that nothing could have been more natural than Lucy 's conduct , nor more self-evident than the motive of it .
Elinor scolded him , harshly as ladies always scold the imprudence which compliments themselves , for having spent so much time with them at Norland , when he must have felt his own inconstancy .
`` Your behaviour was certainly very wrong , '' said she ; '' because -- to say nothing of my own conviction , our relations were all led away by it to fancy and expect WHAT , as you were THEN situated , could never be . ''
He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart , and a mistaken confidence in the force of his engagement .
`` I was simple enough to think , that because my FAITH was plighted to another , there could be no danger in my being with you ; and that the consciousness of my engagement was to keep my heart as safe and sacred as my honour .
I felt that I admired you , but I told myself it was only friendship ; and till I began to make comparisons between yourself and Lucy , I did not know how far I was got .
After that , I suppose , I WAS wrong in remaining so much in Sussex , and the arguments with which I reconciled myself to the expediency of it , were no better than these : -- The danger is my own ; I am doing no injury to anybody but myself . ''
Elinor smiled , and shook her head .
Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon's being expected at the Cottage , as he really wished not only to be better acquainted with him , but to have an opportunity of convincing him that he no longer resented his giving him the living of Delaford -- '' Which , at present , '' said he , `` after thanks so ungraciously delivered as mine were on the occasion , he must think I have never forgiven him for offering . ''
NOW he felt astonished himself that he had never yet been to the place .
But so little interest had be taken in the matter , that he owed all his knowledge of the house , garden , and glebe , extent of the parish , condition of the land , and rate of the tithes , to Elinor herself , who had heard so much of it from Colonel Brandon , and heard it with so much attention , as to be entirely mistress of the subject .
One question after this only remained undecided , between them , one difficulty only was to be overcome .
They were brought together by mutual affection , with the warmest approbation of their real friends ; their intimate knowledge of each other seemed to make their happiness certain -- and they only wanted something to live upon .
Edward had two thousand pounds , and Elinor one , which , with Delaford living , was all that they could call their own ; for it was impossible that Mrs .
Dashwood should advance anything ; and they were neither of them quite enough in love to think that three hundred and fifty pounds a-year would supply them with the comforts of life .
Edward was not entirely without hopes of some favourable change in his mother towards him ; and on THAT he rested for the residue of their income .
But Elinor had no such dependence ; for since Edward would still be unable to marry Miss Morton , and his chusing herself had been spoken of in Mrs .
Ferrars 's flattering language as only a lesser evil than his chusing Lucy Steele , she feared that Robert 's offence would serve no other purpose than to enrich Fanny .
About four days after Edward 's arrival Colonel Brandon appeared , to complete Mrs .
Dashwood 's satisfaction , and to give her the dignity of having , for the first time since her living at Barton , more company with her than her house would hold .
Edward was allowed to retain the privilege of first comer , and Colonel Brandon therefore walked every night to his old quarters at the Park ; from whence he usually returned in the morning , early enough to interrupt the lovers ' first tete-a-tete before breakfast .
A three weeks ' residence at Delaford , where , in his evening hours at least , he had little to do but to calculate the disproportion between thirty-six and seventeen , brought him to Barton in a temper of mind which needed all the improvement in Marianne 's looks , all the kindness of her welcome , and all the encouragement of her mother 's language , to make it cheerful .
Among such friends , however , and such flattery , he did revive .
No rumour of Lucy 's marriage had yet reached him : -- he knew nothing of what had passed ; and the first hours of his visit were consequently spent in hearing and in wondering .
Every thing was explained to him by Mrs .
Dashwood , and he found fresh reason to rejoice in what he had done for Mr .
Ferrars , since eventually it promoted the interest of Elinor .
It would be needless to say , that the gentlemen advanced in the good opinion of each other , as they advanced in each other 's acquaintance , for it could not be otherwise .
Their resemblance in good principles and good sense , in disposition and manner of thinking , would probably have been sufficient to unite them in friendship , without any other attraction ; but their being in love with two sisters , and two sisters fond of each other , made that mutual regard inevitable and immediate , which might otherwise have waited the effect of time and judgment .
The letters from town , which a few days before would have made every nerve in Elinor 's body thrill with transport , now arrived to be read with less emotion that mirth .
Mrs .
Jennings wrote to tell the wonderful tale , to vent her honest indignation against the jilting girl , and pour forth her compassion towards poor Mr .
Edward , who , she was sure , had quite doted upon the worthless hussy , and was now , by all accounts , almost broken-hearted , at Oxford. -- '' I do think , '' she continued , `` nothing was ever carried on so sly ; for it was but two days before Lucy called and sat a couple of hours with me .
Not a soul suspected anything of the matter , not even Nancy , who , poor soul !
came crying to me the day after , in a great fright for fear of Mrs .
Ferrars , as well as not knowing how to get to Plymouth ; for Lucy it seems borrowed all her money before she went off to be married , on purpose we suppose to make a show with , and poor Nancy had not seven shillings in the world ; -- so I was very glad to give her five guineas to take her down to Exeter , where she thinks of staying three or four weeks with Mrs .
Burgess , in hopes , as I tell her , to fall in with the Doctor again .
And I must say that Lucy 's crossness not to take them along with them in the chaise is worse than all .
Poor Mr .
Edward !
I can not get him out of my head , but you must send for him to Barton , and Miss Marianne must try to comfort him . ''
Mr .
Dashwood 's strains were more solemn .
Mrs .
Ferrars was the most unfortunate of women -- poor Fanny had suffered agonies of sensibility -- and he considered the existence of each , under such a blow , with grateful wonder .
Robert 's offence was unpardonable , but Lucy 's was infinitely worse .
Neither of them were ever again to be mentioned to Mrs .
Ferrars ; and even , if she might hereafter be induced to forgive her son , his wife should never be acknowledged as her daughter , nor be permitted to appear in her presence .
The secrecy with which everything had been carried on between them , was rationally treated as enormously heightening the crime , because , had any suspicion of it occurred to the others , proper measures would have been taken to prevent the marriage ; and he called on Elinor to join with him in regretting that Lucy 's engagement with Edward had not rather been fulfilled , than that she should thus be the means of spreading misery farther in the family. -- He thus continued : '' Mrs .
Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edward 's name , which does not surprise us ; but , to our great astonishment , not a line has been received from him on the occasion .
Perhaps , however , he is kept silent by his fear of offending , and I shall , therefore , give him a hint , by a line to Oxford , that his sister and I both think a letter of proper submission from him , addressed perhaps to Fanny , and by her shewn to her mother , might not be taken amiss ; for we all know the tenderness of Mrs .
Ferrars 's heart , and that she wishes for nothing so much as to be on good terms with her children . ''
This paragraph was of some importance to the prospects and conduct of Edward .
It determined him to attempt a reconciliation , though not exactly in the manner pointed out by their brother and sister .
`` A letter of proper submission ! ''
repeated he ; '' would they have me beg my mother 's pardon for Robert's ingratitude to HER , and breach of honour to ME ? -- I can make no submission -- I am grown neither humble nor penitent by what has passed. -- I am grown very happy ; but that would not interest. -- I know of no submission that IS proper for me to make . ''
`` You may certainly ask to be forgiven , '' said Elinor , '' because you have offended ; -- and I should think you might NOW venture so far as to profess some concern for having ever formed the engagement which drew on you your mother 's anger . ''
He agreed that he might .
`` And when she has forgiven you , perhaps a little humility may be convenient while acknowledging a second engagement , almost as imprudent in HER eyes as the first . ''
He had nothing to urge against it , but still resisted the idea of a letter of proper submission ; and therefore , to make it easier to him , as he declared a much greater willingness to make mean concessions by word of mouth than on paper , it was resolved that , instead of writing to Fanny , he should go to London , and personally intreat her good offices in his favour. -- '' And if they really DO interest themselves , '' said Marianne , in her new character of candour , `` in bringing about a reconciliation , I shall think that even John and Fanny are not entirely without merit . ''
After a visit on Colonel Brandon 's side of only three or four days , the two gentlemen quitted Barton together. -- They were to go immediately to Delaford , that Edward might have some personal knowledge of his future home , and assist his patron and friend in deciding on what improvements were needed to it ; and from thence , after staying there a couple of nights , he was to proceed on his journey to town .
CHAPTER 50 After a proper resistance on the part of Mrs .
Ferrars , just so violent and so steady as to preserve her from that reproach which she always seemed fearful of incurring , the reproach of being too amiable , Edward was admitted to her presence , and pronounced to be again her son .
Her family had of late been exceedingly fluctuating .
For many years of her life she had had two sons ; but the crime and annihilation of Edward a few weeks ago , had robbed her of one ; the similar annihilation of Robert had left her for a fortnight without any ; and now , by the resuscitation of Edward , she had one again .
In spite of his being allowed once more to live , however , he did not feel the continuance of his existence secure , till he had revealed his present engagement ; for the publication of that circumstance , he feared , might give a sudden turn to his constitution , and carry him off as rapidly as before .
With apprehensive caution therefore it was revealed , and he was listened to with unexpected calmness .
Mrs .
Ferrars at first reasonably endeavoured to dissuade him from marrying Miss Dashwood , by every argument in her power ; -- told him , that in Miss Morton he would have a woman of higher rank and larger fortune ; -- and enforced the assertion , by observing that Miss Morton was the daughter of a nobleman with thirty thousand pounds , while Miss Dashwood was only the daughter of a private gentleman with no more than THREE ; but when she found that , though perfectly admitting the truth of her representation , he was by no means inclined to be guided by it , she judged it wisest , from the experience of the past , to submit -- and therefore , after such an ungracious delay as she owed to her own dignity , and as served to prevent every suspicion of good-will , she issued her decree of consent to the marriage of Edward and Elinor .
What she would engage to do towards augmenting their income was next to be considered ; and here it plainly appeared , that though Edward was now her only son , he was by no means her eldest ; for while Robert was inevitably endowed with a thousand pounds a-year , not the smallest objection was made against Edward 's taking orders for the sake of two hundred and fifty at the utmost ; nor was anything promised either for the present or in future , beyond the ten thousand pounds , which had been given with Fanny .
It was as much , however , as was desired , and more than was expected , by Edward and Elinor ; and Mrs .
Ferrars herself , by her shuffling excuses , seemed the only person surprised at her not giving more .
With an income quite sufficient to their wants thus secured to them , they had nothing to wait for after Edward was in possession of the living , but the readiness of the house , to which Colonel Brandon , with an eager desire for the accommodation of Elinor , was making considerable improvements ; and after waiting some time for their completion , after experiencing , as usual , a thousand disappointments and delays from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmen , Elinor , as usual , broke through the first positive resolution of not marrying till every thing was ready , and the ceremony took place in Barton church early in the autumn .
The first month after their marriage was spent with their friend at the Mansion-house ; from whence they could superintend the progress of the Parsonage , and direct every thing as they liked on the spot ; -- could chuse papers , project shrubberies , and invent a sweep .
Mrs .
Jennings 's prophecies , though rather jumbled together , were chiefly fulfilled ; for she was able to visit Edward and his wife in their Parsonage by Michaelmas , and she found in Elinor and her husband , as she really believed , one of the happiest couples in the world .
They had in fact nothing to wish for , but the marriage of Colonel Brandon and Marianne , and rather better pasturage for their cows .
They were visited on their first settling by almost all their relations and friends .
Mrs .
Ferrars came to inspect the happiness which she was almost ashamed of having authorised ; and even the Dashwoods were at the expense of a journey from Sussex to do them honour .
`` I will not say that I am disappointed , my dear sister , '' said John , as they were walking together one morning before the gates of Delaford House , `` THAT would be saying too much , for certainly you have been one of the most fortunate young women in the world , as it is .
But , I confess , it would give me great pleasure to call Colonel Brandon brother .
His property here , his place , his house , every thing is in such respectable and excellent condition ! -- and his woods ! -- I have not seen such timber any where in Dorsetshire , as there is now standing in Delaford Hanger ! -- And though , perhaps , Marianne may not seem exactly the person to attract him -- yet I think it would altogether be advisable for you to have them now frequently staying with you , for as Colonel Brandon seems a great deal at home , nobody can tell what may happen -- for , when people are much thrown together , and see little of anybody else -- and it will always be in your power to set her off to advantage , and so forth ; -- in short , you may as well give her a chance -- You understand me . ''
-- But though Mrs .
Ferrars DID come to see them , and always treated them with the make-believe of decent affection , they were never insulted by her real favour and preference .
THAT was due to the folly of Robert , and the cunning of his wife ; and it was earned by them before many months had passed away .
The selfish sagacity of the latter , which had at first drawn Robert into the scrape , was the principal instrument of his deliverance from it ; for her respectful humility , assiduous attentions , and endless flatteries , as soon as the smallest opening was given for their exercise , reconciled Mrs .
Ferrars to his choice , and re-established him completely in her favour .
The whole of Lucy 's behaviour in the affair , and the prosperity which crowned it , therefore , may be held forth as a most encouraging instance of what an earnest , an unceasing attention to self-interest , however its progress may be apparently obstructed , will do in securing every advantage of fortune , with no other sacrifice than that of time and conscience .
When Robert first sought her acquaintance , and privately visited her in Bartlett 's Buildings , it was only with the view imputed to him by his brother .
He merely meant to persuade her to give up the engagement ; and as there could be nothing to overcome but the affection of both , he naturally expected that one or two interviews would settle the matter .
In that point , however , and that only , he erred ; -- for though Lucy soon gave him hopes that his eloquence would convince her in TIME , another visit , another conversation , was always wanted to produce this conviction .
Some doubts always lingered in her mind when they parted , which could only be removed by another half hour 's discourse with himself .
His attendance was by this means secured , and the rest followed in course .
Instead of talking of Edward , they came gradually to talk only of Robert , -- a subject on which he had always more to say than on any other , and in which she soon betrayed an interest even equal to his own ; and in short , it became speedily evident to both , that he had entirely supplanted his brother .
He was proud of his conquest , proud of tricking Edward , and very proud of marrying privately without his mother 's consent .
What immediately followed is known .
They passed some months in great happiness at Dawlish ; for she had many relations and old acquaintances to cut -- and he drew several plans for magnificent cottages ; -- and from thence returning to town , procured the forgiveness of Mrs .
Ferrars , by the simple expedient of asking it , which , at Lucy 's instigation , was adopted .
The forgiveness , at first , indeed , as was reasonable , comprehended only Robert ; and Lucy , who had owed his mother no duty and therefore could have transgressed none , still remained some weeks longer unpardoned .
But perseverance in humility of conduct and messages , in self-condemnation for Robert 's offence , and gratitude for the unkindness she was treated with , procured her in time the haughty notice which overcame her by its graciousness , and led soon afterwards , by rapid degrees , to the highest state of affection and influence .
Lucy became as necessary to Mrs .
Ferrars , as either Robert or Fanny ; and while Edward was never cordially forgiven for having once intended to marry her , and Elinor , though superior to her in fortune and birth , was spoken of as an intruder , SHE was in every thing considered , and always openly acknowledged , to be a favourite child .
They settled in town , received very liberal assistance from Mrs .
Ferrars , were on the best terms imaginable with the Dashwoods ; and setting aside the jealousies and ill-will continually subsisting between Fanny and Lucy , in which their husbands of course took a part , as well as the frequent domestic disagreements between Robert and Lucy themselves , nothing could exceed the harmony in which they all lived together .
What Edward had done to forfeit the right of eldest son , might have puzzled many people to find out ; and what Robert had done to succeed to it , might have puzzled them still more .
It was an arrangement , however , justified in its effects , if not in its cause ; for nothing ever appeared in Robert 's style of living or of talking to give a suspicion of his regretting the extent of his income , as either leaving his brother too little , or bringing himself too much ; -- and if Edward might be judged from the ready discharge of his duties in every particular , from an increasing attachment to his wife and his home , and from the regular cheerfulness of his spirits , he might be supposed no less contented with his lot , no less free from every wish of an exchange .
Elinor 's marriage divided her as little from her family as could well be contrived , without rendering the cottage at Barton entirely useless , for her mother and sisters spent much more than half their time with her .
Mrs .
Dashwood was acting on motives of policy as well as pleasure in the frequency of her visits at Delaford ; for her wish of bringing Marianne and Colonel Brandon together was hardly less earnest , though rather more liberal than what John had expressed .
It was now her darling object .
Precious as was the company of her daughter to her , she desired nothing so much as to give up its constant enjoyment to her valued friend ; and to see Marianne settled at the mansion-house was equally the wish of Edward and Elinor .
They each felt his sorrows , and their own obligations , and Marianne , by general consent , was to be the reward of all .
With such a confederacy against her -- with a knowledge so intimate of his goodness -- with a conviction of his fond attachment to herself , which at last , though long after it was observable to everybody else -- burst on her -- what could she do ?
Marianne Dashwood was born to an extraordinary fate .
She was born to discover the falsehood of her own opinions , and to counteract , by her conduct , her most favourite maxims .
She was born to overcome an affection formed so late in life as at seventeen , and with no sentiment superior to strong esteem and lively friendship , voluntarily to give her hand to another ! -- and THAT other , a man who had suffered no less than herself under the event of a former attachment , whom , two years before , she had considered too old to be married , -- and who still sought the constitutional safeguard of a flannel waistcoat !
But so it was .
Instead of falling a sacrifice to an irresistible passion , as once she had fondly flattered herself with expecting , -- instead of remaining even for ever with her mother , and finding her only pleasures in retirement and study , as afterwards in her more calm and sober judgment she had determined on , -- she found herself at nineteen , submitting to new attachments , entering on new duties , placed in a new home , a wife , the mistress of a family , and the patroness of a village .
Colonel Brandon was now as happy , as all those who best loved him , believed he deserved to be ; -- in Marianne he was consoled for every past affliction ; -- her regard and her society restored his mind to animation , and his spirits to cheerfulness ; and that Marianne found her own happiness in forming his , was equally the persuasion and delight of each observing friend .
Marianne could never love by halves ; and her whole heart became , in time , as much devoted to her husband , as it had once been to Willoughby .
Willoughby could not hear of her marriage without a pang ; and his punishment was soon afterwards complete in the voluntary forgiveness of Mrs .
Smith , who , by stating his marriage with a woman of character , as the source of her clemency , gave him reason for believing that had he behaved with honour towards Marianne , he might at once have been happy and rich .
That his repentance of misconduct , which thus brought its own punishment , was sincere , need not be doubted ; -- nor that he long thought of Colonel Brandon with envy , and of Marianne with regret .
But that he was for ever inconsolable , that he fled from society , or contracted an habitual gloom of temper , or died of a broken heart , must not be depended on -- for he did neither .
He lived to exert , and frequently to enjoy himself .
His wife was not always out of humour , nor his home always uncomfortable ; and in his breed of horses and dogs , and in sporting of every kind , he found no inconsiderable degree of domestic felicity .
For Marianne , however -- in spite of his incivility in surviving her loss -- he always retained that decided regard which interested him in every thing that befell her , and made her his secret standard of perfection in woman ; -- and many a rising beauty would be slighted by him in after-days as bearing no comparison with Mrs .
Brandon .
Mrs .
Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the cottage , without attempting a removal to Delaford ; and fortunately for Sir John and Mrs .
Jennings , when Marianne was taken from them , Margaret had reached an age highly suitable for dancing , and not very ineligible for being supposed to have a lover .
Between Barton and Delaford , there was that constant communication which strong family affection would naturally dictate ; -- and among the merits and the happiness of Elinor and Marianne , let it not be ranked as the least considerable , that though sisters , and living almost within sight of each other , they could live without disagreement between themselves , or producing coolness between their husbands .
THE END

[ Persuasion by Jane Austen 1818 ] Chapter 1 Sir Walter Elliot , of Kellynch Hall , in Somersetshire , was a man who , for his own amusement , never took up any book but the Baronetage ; there he found occupation for an idle hour , and consolation in a distressed one ; there his faculties were roused into admiration and respect , by contemplating the limited remnant of the earliest patents ; there any unwelcome sensations , arising from domestic affairs changed naturally into pity and contempt as he turned over the almost endless creations of the last century ; and there , if every other leaf were powerless , he could read his own history with an interest which never failed .
This was the page at which the favourite volume always opened : `` ELLIOT OF KELLYNCH HALL .
`` Walter Elliot , born March 1 , 1760 , married , July 15 , 1784 , Elizabeth , daughter of James Stevenson , Esq .
of South Park , in the county of Gloucester , by which lady ( who died 1800 ) he has issue Elizabeth , born June 1 , 1785 ; Anne , born August 9 , 1787 ; a still-born son , November 5 , 1789 ; Mary , born November 20 , 1791 . ''
Precisely such had the paragraph originally stood from the printer 's hands ; but Sir Walter had improved it by adding , for the information of himself and his family , these words , after the date of Mary 's birth -- '' Married , December 16 , 1810 , Charles , son and heir of Charles Musgrove , Esq .
of Uppercross , in the county of Somerset , '' and by inserting most accurately the day of the month on which he had lost his wife .
Then followed the history and rise of the ancient and respectable family , in the usual terms ; how it had been first settled in Cheshire ; how mentioned in Dugdale , serving the office of high sheriff , representing a borough in three successive parliaments , exertions of loyalty , and dignity of baronet , in the first year of Charles II , with all the Marys and Elizabeths they had married ; forming altogether two handsome duodecimo pages , and concluding with the arms and motto : -- '' Principal seat , Kellynch Hall , in the county of Somerset , '' and Sir Walter 's handwriting again in this finale : -- '' Heir presumptive , William Walter Elliot , Esq. , great grandson of the second Sir Walter . ''
Vanity was the beginning and the end of Sir Walter Elliot 's character ; vanity of person and of situation .
He had been remarkably handsome in his youth ; and , at fifty-four , was still a very fine man .
Few women could think more of their personal appearance than he did , nor could the valet of any new made lord be more delighted with the place he held in society .
He considered the blessing of beauty as inferior only to the blessing of a baronetcy ; and the Sir Walter Elliot , who united these gifts , was the constant object of his warmest respect and devotion .
His good looks and his rank had one fair claim on his attachment ; since to them he must have owed a wife of very superior character to any thing deserved by his own .
Lady Elliot had been an excellent woman , sensible and amiable ; whose judgement and conduct , if they might be pardoned the youthful infatuation which made her Lady Elliot , had never required indulgence afterwards. -- She had humoured , or softened , or concealed his failings , and promoted his real respectability for seventeen years ; and though not the very happiest being in the world herself , had found enough in her duties , her friends , and her children , to attach her to life , and make it no matter of indifference to her when she was called on to quit them .
-- Three girls , the two eldest sixteen and fourteen , was an awful legacy for a mother to bequeath , an awful charge rather , to confide to the authority and guidance of a conceited , silly father .
She had , however , one very intimate friend , a sensible , deserving woman , who had been brought , by strong attachment to herself , to settle close by her , in the village of Kellynch ; and on her kindness and advice , Lady Elliot mainly relied for the best help and maintenance of the good principles and instruction which she had been anxiously giving her daughters .
This friend , and Sir Walter , did not marry , whatever might have been anticipated on that head by their acquaintance .
Thirteen years had passed away since Lady Elliot 's death , and they were still near neighbours and intimate friends , and one remained a widower , the other a widow .
That Lady Russell , of steady age and character , and extremely well provided for , should have no thought of a second marriage , needs no apology to the public , which is rather apt to be unreasonably discontented when a woman does marry again , than when she does not ; but Sir Walter 's continuing in singleness requires explanation .
Be it known then , that Sir Walter , like a good father , ( having met with one or two private disappointments in very unreasonable applications ) , prided himself on remaining single for his dear daughters ' sake .
For one daughter , his eldest , he would really have given up any thing , which he had not been very much tempted to do .
Elizabeth had succeeded , at sixteen , to all that was possible , of her mother 's rights and consequence ; and being very handsome , and very like himself , her influence had always been great , and they had gone on together most happily .
His two other children were of very inferior value .
Mary had acquired a little artificial importance , by becoming Mrs Charles Musgrove ; but Anne , with an elegance of mind and sweetness of character , which must have placed her high with any people of real understanding , was nobody with either father or sister ; her word had no weight , her convenience was always to give way -- she was only Anne .
To Lady Russell , indeed , she was a most dear and highly valued god-daughter , favourite , and friend .
Lady Russell loved them all ; but it was only in Anne that she could fancy the mother to revive again .
A few years before , Anne Elliot had been a very pretty girl , but her bloom had vanished early ; and as even in its height , her father had found little to admire in her , ( so totally different were her delicate features and mild dark eyes from his own ) , there could be nothing in them , now that she was faded and thin , to excite his esteem .
He had never indulged much hope , he had now none , of ever reading her name in any other page of his favourite work .
All equality of alliance must rest with Elizabeth , for Mary had merely connected herself with an old country family of respectability and large fortune , and had therefore given all the honour and received none : Elizabeth would , one day or other , marry suitably .
It sometimes happens that a woman is handsomer at twenty-nine than she was ten years before ; and , generally speaking , if there has been neither ill health nor anxiety , it is a time of life at which scarcely any charm is lost .
It was so with Elizabeth , still the same handsome Miss Elliot that she had begun to be thirteen years ago , and Sir Walter might be excused , therefore , in forgetting her age , or , at least , be deemed only half a fool , for thinking himself and Elizabeth as blooming as ever , amidst the wreck of the good looks of everybody else ; for he could plainly see how old all the rest of his family and acquaintance were growing .
Anne haggard , Mary coarse , every face in the neighbourhood worsting , and the rapid increase of the crow 's foot about Lady Russell 's temples had long been a distress to him .
Elizabeth did not quite equal her father in personal contentment .
Thirteen years had seen her mistress of Kellynch Hall , presiding and directing with a self-possession and decision which could never have given the idea of her being younger than she was .
For thirteen years had she been doing the honours , and laying down the domestic law at home , and leading the way to the chaise and four , and walking immediately after Lady Russell out of all the drawing-rooms and dining-rooms in the country .
Thirteen winters ' revolving frosts had seen her opening every ball of credit which a scanty neighbourhood afforded , and thirteen springs shewn their blossoms , as she travelled up to London with her father , for a few weeks ' annual enjoyment of the great world .
She had the remembrance of all this , she had the consciousness of being nine-and-twenty to give her some regrets and some apprehensions ; she was fully satisfied of being still quite as handsome as ever , but she felt her approach to the years of danger , and would have rejoiced to be certain of being properly solicited by baronet-blood within the next twelvemonth or two .
Then might she again take up the book of books with as much enjoyment as in her early youth , but now she liked it not .
Always to be presented with the date of her own birth and see no marriage follow but that of a youngest sister , made the book an evil ; and more than once , when her father had left it open on the table near her , had she closed it , with averted eyes , and pushed it away .
She had had a disappointment , moreover , which that book , and especially the history of her own family , must ever present the remembrance of .
The heir presumptive , the very William Walter Elliot , Esq. , whose rights had been so generously supported by her father , had disappointed her .
She had , while a very young girl , as soon as she had known him to be , in the event of her having no brother , the future baronet , meant to marry him , and her father had always meant that she should .
He had not been known to them as a boy ; but soon after Lady Elliot 's death , Sir Walter had sought the acquaintance , and though his overtures had not been met with any warmth , he had persevered in seeking it , making allowance for the modest drawing-back of youth ; and , in one of their spring excursions to London , when Elizabeth was in her first bloom , Mr Elliot had been forced into the introduction .
He was at that time a very young man , just engaged in the study of the law ; and Elizabeth found him extremely agreeable , and every plan in his favour was confirmed .
He was invited to Kellynch Hall ; he was talked of and expected all the rest of the year ; but he never came .
The following spring he was seen again in town , found equally agreeable , again encouraged , invited , and expected , and again he did not come ; and the next tidings were that he was married .
Instead of pushing his fortune in the line marked out for the heir of the house of Elliot , he had purchased independence by uniting himself to a rich woman of inferior birth .
Sir Walter has resented it .
As the head of the house , he felt that he ought to have been consulted , especially after taking the young man so publicly by the hand ; `` For they must have been seen together , '' he observed , `` once at Tattersall 's , and twice in the lobby of the House of Commons . ''
His disapprobation was expressed , but apparently very little regarded .
Mr Elliot had attempted no apology , and shewn himself as unsolicitous of being longer noticed by the family , as Sir Walter considered him unworthy of it : all acquaintance between them had ceased .
This very awkward history of Mr Elliot was still , after an interval of several years , felt with anger by Elizabeth , who had liked the man for himself , and still more for being her father 's heir , and whose strong family pride could see only in him a proper match for Sir Walter Elliot 's eldest daughter .
There was not a baronet from A to Z whom her feelings could have so willingly acknowledged as an equal .
Yet so miserably had he conducted himself , that though she was at this present time ( the summer of 1814 ) wearing black ribbons for his wife , she could not admit him to be worth thinking of again .
The disgrace of his first marriage might , perhaps , as there was no reason to suppose it perpetuated by offspring , have been got over , had he not done worse ; but he had , as by the accustomary intervention of kind friends , they had been informed , spoken most disrespectfully of them all , most slightingly and contemptuously of the very blood he belonged to , and the honours which were hereafter to be his own .
This could not be pardoned .
Such were Elizabeth Elliot 's sentiments and sensations ; such the cares to alloy , the agitations to vary , the sameness and the elegance , the prosperity and the nothingness of her scene of life ; such the feelings to give interest to a long , uneventful residence in one country circle , to fill the vacancies which there were no habits of utility abroad , no talents or accomplishments for home , to occupy .
But now , another occupation and solicitude of mind was beginning to be added to these .
Her father was growing distressed for money .
She knew , that when he now took up the Baronetage , it was to drive the heavy bills of his tradespeople , and the unwelcome hints of Mr Shepherd , his agent , from his thoughts .
The Kellynch property was good , but not equal to Sir Walter 's apprehension of the state required in its possessor .
While Lady Elliot lived , there had been method , moderation , and economy , which had just kept him within his income ; but with her had died all such right-mindedness , and from that period he had been constantly exceeding it .
It had not been possible for him to spend less ; he had done nothing but what Sir Walter Elliot was imperiously called on to do ; but blameless as he was , he was not only growing dreadfully in debt , but was hearing of it so often , that it became vain to attempt concealing it longer , even partially , from his daughter .
He had given her some hints of it the last spring in town ; he had gone so far even as to say , `` Can we retrench ?
Does it occur to you that there is any one article in which we can retrench ? ''
and Elizabeth , to do her justice , had , in the first ardour of female alarm , set seriously to think what could be done , and had finally proposed these two branches of economy , to cut off some unnecessary charities , and to refrain from new furnishing the drawing-room ; to which expedients she afterwards added the happy thought of their taking no present down to Anne , as had been the usual yearly custom .
But these measures , however good in themselves , were insufficient for the real extent of the evil , the whole of which Sir Walter found himself obliged to confess to her soon afterwards .
Elizabeth had nothing to propose of deeper efficacy .
She felt herself ill-used and unfortunate , as did her father ; and they were neither of them able to devise any means of lessening their expenses without compromising their dignity , or relinquishing their comforts in a way not to be borne .
There was only a small part of his estate that Sir Walter could dispose of ; but had every acre been alienable , it would have made no difference .
He had condescended to mortgage as far as he had the power , but he would never condescend to sell .
No ; he would never disgrace his name so far .
The Kellynch estate should be transmitted whole and entire , as he had received it .
Their two confidential friends , Mr Shepherd , who lived in the neighbouring market town , and Lady Russell , were called to advise them ; and both father and daughter seemed to expect that something should be struck out by one or the other to remove their embarrassments and reduce their expenditure , without involving the loss of any indulgence of taste or pride .
Chapter 2 Mr Shepherd , a civil , cautious lawyer , who , whatever might be his hold or his views on Sir Walter , would rather have the disagreeable prompted by anybody else , excused himself from offering the slightest hint , and only begged leave to recommend an implicit reference to the excellent judgement of Lady Russell , from whose known good sense he fully expected to have just such resolute measures advised as he meant to see finally adopted .
Lady Russell was most anxiously zealous on the subject , and gave it much serious consideration .
She was a woman rather of sound than of quick abilities , whose difficulties in coming to any decision in this instance were great , from the opposition of two leading principles .
She was of strict integrity herself , with a delicate sense of honour ; but she was as desirous of saving Sir Walter 's feelings , as solicitous for the credit of the family , as aristocratic in her ideas of what was due to them , as anybody of sense and honesty could well be .
She was a benevolent , charitable , good woman , and capable of strong attachments , most correct in her conduct , strict in her notions of decorum , and with manners that were held a standard of good-breeding .
She had a cultivated mind , and was , generally speaking , rational and consistent ; but she had prejudices on the side of ancestry ; she had a value for rank and consequence , which blinded her a little to the faults of those who possessed them .
Herself the widow of only a knight , she gave the dignity of a baronet all its due ; and Sir Walter , independent of his claims as an old acquaintance , an attentive neighbour , an obliging landlord , the husband of her very dear friend , the father of Anne and her sisters , was , as being Sir Walter , in her apprehension , entitled to a great deal of compassion and consideration under his present difficulties .
They must retrench ; that did not admit of a doubt .
But she was very anxious to have it done with the least possible pain to him and Elizabeth .
She drew up plans of economy , she made exact calculations , and she did what nobody else thought of doing : she consulted Anne , who never seemed considered by the others as having any interest in the question .
She consulted , and in a degree was influenced by her in marking out the scheme of retrenchment which was at last submitted to Sir Walter .
Every emendation of Anne 's had been on the side of honesty against importance .
She wanted more vigorous measures , a more complete reformation , a quicker release from debt , a much higher tone of indifference for everything but justice and equity .
`` If we can persuade your father to all this , '' said Lady Russell , looking over her paper , `` much may be done .
If he will adopt these regulations , in seven years he will be clear ; and I hope we may be able to convince him and Elizabeth , that Kellynch Hall has a respectability in itself which can not be affected by these reductions ; and that the true dignity of Sir Walter Elliot will be very far from lessened in the eyes of sensible people , by acting like a man of principle .
What will he be doing , in fact , but what very many of our first families have done , or ought to do ?
There will be nothing singular in his case ; and it is singularity which often makes the worst part of our suffering , as it always does of our conduct .
I have great hope of prevailing .
We must be serious and decided ; for after all , the person who has contracted debts must pay them ; and though a great deal is due to the feelings of the gentleman , and the head of a house , like your father , there is still more due to the character of an honest man . ''
This was the principle on which Anne wanted her father to be proceeding , his friends to be urging him .
She considered it as an act of indispensable duty to clear away the claims of creditors with all the expedition which the most comprehensive retrenchments could secure , and saw no dignity in anything short of it .
She wanted it to be prescribed , and felt as a duty .
She rated Lady Russell 's influence highly ; and as to the severe degree of self-denial which her own conscience prompted , she believed there might be little more difficulty in persuading them to a complete , than to half a reformation .
Her knowledge of her father and Elizabeth inclined her to think that the sacrifice of one pair of horses would be hardly less painful than of both , and so on , through the whole list of Lady Russell 's too gentle reductions .
How Anne 's more rigid requisitions might have been taken is of little consequence .
Lady Russell 's had no success at all : could not be put up with , were not to be borne .
`` What !
every comfort of life knocked off !
Journeys , London , servants , horses , table -- contractions and restrictions every where !
To live no longer with the decencies even of a private gentleman !
No , he would sooner quit Kellynch Hall at once , than remain in it on such disgraceful terms . ''
`` Quit Kellynch Hall . ''
The hint was immediately taken up by Mr Shepherd , whose interest was involved in the reality of Sir Walter 's retrenching , and who was perfectly persuaded that nothing would be done without a change of abode .
`` Since the idea had been started in the very quarter which ought to dictate , he had no scruple , '' he said , `` in confessing his judgement to be entirely on that side .
It did not appear to him that Sir Walter could materially alter his style of living in a house which had such a character of hospitality and ancient dignity to support .
In any other place Sir Walter might judge for himself ; and would be looked up to , as regulating the modes of life in whatever way he might choose to model his household . ''
Sir Walter would quit Kellynch Hall ; and after a very few days more of doubt and indecision , the great question of whither he should go was settled , and the first outline of this important change made out .
There had been three alternatives , London , Bath , or another house in the country .
All Anne 's wishes had been for the latter .
A small house in their own neighbourhood , where they might still have Lady Russell 's society , still be near Mary , and still have the pleasure of sometimes seeing the lawns and groves of Kellynch , was the object of her ambition .
But the usual fate of Anne attended her , in having something very opposite from her inclination fixed on .
She disliked Bath , and did not think it agreed with her ; and Bath was to be her home .
Sir Walter had at first thought more of London ; but Mr Shepherd felt that he could not be trusted in London , and had been skilful enough to dissuade him from it , and make Bath preferred .
It was a much safer place for a gentleman in his predicament : he might there be important at comparatively little expense .
Two material advantages of Bath over London had of course been given all their weight : its more convenient distance from Kellynch , only fifty miles , and Lady Russell 's spending some part of every winter there ; and to the very great satisfaction of Lady Russell , whose first views on the projected change had been for Bath , Sir Walter and Elizabeth were induced to believe that they should lose neither consequence nor enjoyment by settling there .
Lady Russell felt obliged to oppose her dear Anne 's known wishes .
It would be too much to expect Sir Walter to descend into a small house in his own neighbourhood .
Anne herself would have found the mortifications of it more than she foresaw , and to Sir Walter's feelings they must have been dreadful .
And with regard to Anne's dislike of Bath , she considered it as a prejudice and mistake arising , first , from the circumstance of her having been three years at school there , after her mother 's death ; and secondly , from her happening to be not in perfectly good spirits the only winter which she had afterwards spent there with herself .
Lady Russell was fond of Bath , in short , and disposed to think it must suit them all ; and as to her young friend 's health , by passing all the warm months with her at Kellynch Lodge , every danger would be avoided ; and it was in fact , a change which must do both health and spirits good .
Anne had been too little from home , too little seen .
Her spirits were not high .
A larger society would improve them .
She wanted her to be more known .
The undesirableness of any other house in the same neighbourhood for Sir Walter was certainly much strengthened by one part , and a very material part of the scheme , which had been happily engrafted on the beginning .
He was not only to quit his home , but to see it in the hands of others ; a trial of fortitude , which stronger heads than Sir Walter 's have found too much .
Kellynch Hall was to be let .
This , however , was a profound secret , not to be breathed beyond their own circle .
Sir Walter could not have borne the degradation of being known to design letting his house .
Mr Shepherd had once mentioned the word '' advertise , '' but never dared approach it again .
Sir Walter spurned the idea of its being offered in any manner ; forbad the slightest hint being dropped of his having such an intention ; and it was only on the supposition of his being spontaneously solicited by some most unexceptionable applicant , on his own terms , and as a great favour , that he would let it at all .
How quick come the reasons for approving what we like !
Lady Russell had another excellent one at hand , for being extremely glad that Sir Walter and his family were to remove from the country .
Elizabeth had been lately forming an intimacy , which she wished to see interrupted .
It was with the daughter of Mr Shepherd , who had returned , after an unprosperous marriage , to her father 's house , with the additional burden of two children .
She was a clever young woman , who understood the art of pleasing -- the art of pleasing , at least , at Kellynch Hall ; and who had made herself so acceptable to Miss Elliot , as to have been already staying there more than once , in spite of all that Lady Russell , who thought it a friendship quite out of place , could hint of caution and reserve .
Lady Russell , indeed , had scarcely any influence with Elizabeth , and seemed to love her , rather because she would love her , than because Elizabeth deserved it .
She had never received from her more than outward attention , nothing beyond the observances of complaisance ; had never succeeded in any point which she wanted to carry , against previous inclination .
She had been repeatedly very earnest in trying to get Anne included in the visit to London , sensibly open to all the injustice and all the discredit of the selfish arrangements which shut her out , and on many lesser occasions had endeavoured to give Elizabeth the advantage of her own better judgement and experience ; but always in vain : Elizabeth would go her own way ; and never had she pursued it in more decided opposition to Lady Russell than in this selection of Mrs Clay ; turning from the society of so deserving a sister , to bestow her affection and confidence on one who ought to have been nothing to her but the object of distant civility .
From situation , Mrs Clay was , in Lady Russell 's estimate , a very unequal , and in her character she believed a very dangerous companion ; and a removal that would leave Mrs Clay behind , and bring a choice of more suitable intimates within Miss Elliot 's reach , was therefore an object of first-rate importance .
Chapter 3 '' I must take leave to observe , Sir Walter , '' said Mr Shepherd one morning at Kellynch Hall , as he laid down the newspaper , '' that the present juncture is much in our favour .
This peace will be turning all our rich naval officers ashore .
They will be all wanting a home .
Could not be a better time , Sir Walter , for having a choice of tenants , very responsible tenants .
Many a noble fortune has been made during the war .
If a rich admiral were to come in our way , Sir Walter -- '' '' He would be a very lucky man , Shepherd , '' replied Sir Walter ; '' that 's all I have to remark .
A prize indeed would Kellynch Hall be to him ; rather the greatest prize of all , let him have taken ever so many before ; hey , Shepherd ? ''
Mr Shepherd laughed , as he knew he must , at this wit , and then added -- '' I presume to observe , Sir Walter , that , in the way of business , gentlemen of the navy are well to deal with .
I have had a little knowledge of their methods of doing business ; and I am free to confess that they have very liberal notions , and are as likely to make desirable tenants as any set of people one should meet with .
Therefore , Sir Walter , what I would take leave to suggest is , that if in consequence of any rumours getting abroad of your intention ; which must be contemplated as a possible thing , because we know how difficult it is to keep the actions and designs of one part of the world from the notice and curiosity of the other ; consequence has its tax ; I , John Shepherd , might conceal any family-matters that I chose , for nobody would think it worth their while to observe me ; but Sir Walter Elliot has eyes upon him which it may be very difficult to elude ; and therefore , thus much I venture upon , that it will not greatly surprise me if , with all our caution , some rumour of the truth should get abroad ; in the supposition of which , as I was going to observe , since applications will unquestionably follow , I should think any from our wealthy naval commanders particularly worth attending to ; and beg leave to add , that two hours will bring me over at any time , to save you the trouble of replying . ''
Sir Walter only nodded .
But soon afterwards , rising and pacing the room , he observed sarcastically -- '' There are few among the gentlemen of the navy , I imagine , who would not be surprised to find themselves in a house of this description . ''
`` They would look around them , no doubt , and bless their good fortune , '' said Mrs Clay , for Mrs Clay was present : her father had driven her over , nothing being of so much use to Mrs Clay 's health as a drive to Kellynch : '' but I quite agree with my father in thinking a sailor might be a very desirable tenant .
I have known a good deal of the profession ; and besides their liberality , they are so neat and careful in all their ways !
These valuable pictures of yours , Sir Walter , if you chose to leave them , would be perfectly safe .
Everything in and about the house would be taken such excellent care of !
The gardens and shrubberies would be kept in almost as high order as they are now .
You need not be afraid , Miss Elliot , of your own sweet flower gardens being neglected . ''
`` As to all that , '' rejoined Sir Walter coolly , `` supposing I were induced to let my house , I have by no means made up my mind as to the privileges to be annexed to it .
I am not particularly disposed to favour a tenant .
The park would be open to him of course , and few navy officers , or men of any other description , can have had such a range ; but what restrictions I might impose on the use of the pleasure-grounds , is another thing .
I am not fond of the idea of my shrubberies being always approachable ; and I should recommend Miss Elliot to be on her guard with respect to her flower garden .
I am very little disposed to grant a tenant of Kellynch Hall any extraordinary favour , I assure you , be he sailor or soldier . ''
After a short pause , Mr Shepherd presumed to say -- '' In all these cases , there are established usages which make everything plain and easy between landlord and tenant .
Your interest , Sir Walter , is in pretty safe hands .
Depend upon me for taking care that no tenant has more than his just rights .
I venture to hint , that Sir Walter Elliot can not be half so jealous for his own , as John Shepherd will be for him . ''
Here Anne spoke -- '' The navy , I think , who have done so much for us , have at least an equal claim with any other set of men , for all the comforts and all the privileges which any home can give .
Sailors work hard enough for their comforts , we must all allow . ''
`` Very true , very true .
What Miss Anne says , is very true , '' was Mr Shepherd 's rejoinder , and `` Oh !
certainly , '' was his daughter 's ; but Sir Walter 's remark was , soon afterwards -- '' The profession has its utility , but I should be sorry to see any friend of mine belonging to it . ''
`` Indeed ! ''
was the reply , and with a look of surprise .
`` Yes ; it is in two points offensive to me ; I have two strong grounds of objection to it .
First , as being the means of bringing persons of obscure birth into undue distinction , and raising men to honours which their fathers and grandfathers never dreamt of ; and secondly , as it cuts up a man 's youth and vigour most horribly ; a sailor grows old sooner than any other man .
I have observed it all my life .
A man is in greater danger in the navy of being insulted by the rise of one whose father , his father might have disdained to speak to , and of becoming prematurely an object of disgust himself , than in any other line .
One day last spring , in town , I was in company with two men , striking instances of what I am talking of ; Lord St Ives , whose father we all know to have been a country curate , without bread to eat ; I was to give place to Lord St Ives , and a certain Admiral Baldwin , the most deplorable-looking personage you can imagine ; his face the colour of mahogany , rough and rugged to the last degree ; all lines and wrinkles , nine grey hairs of a side , and nothing but a dab of powder at top .
` In the name of heaven , who is that old fellow ? '
said I to a friend of mine who was standing near , ( Sir Basil Morley ) .
` Old fellow ! '
cried Sir Basil , ` it is Admiral Baldwin .
What do you take his age to be ? '
` Sixty , ' said I , ` or perhaps sixty-two . '
` Forty , ' replied Sir Basil , ` forty , and no more . '
Picture to yourselves my amazement ; I shall not easily forget Admiral Baldwin .
I never saw quite so wretched an example of what a sea-faring life can do ; but to a degree , I know it is the same with them all : they are all knocked about , and exposed to every climate , and every weather , till they are not fit to be seen .
It is a pity they are not knocked on the head at once , before they reach Admiral Baldwin 's age . ''
`` Nay , Sir Walter , '' cried Mrs Clay , `` this is being severe indeed .
Have a little mercy on the poor men .
We are not all born to be handsome .
The sea is no beautifier , certainly ; sailors do grow old betimes ; I have observed it ; they soon lose the look of youth .
But then , is not it the same with many other professions , perhaps most other ?
Soldiers , in active service , are not at all better off : and even in the quieter professions , there is a toil and a labour of the mind , if not of the body , which seldom leaves a man 's looks to the natural effect of time .
The lawyer plods , quite care-worn ; the physician is up at all hours , and travelling in all weather ; and even the clergyman -- '' she stopt a moment to consider what might do for the clergyman ; -- '' and even the clergyman , you know is obliged to go into infected rooms , and expose his health and looks to all the injury of a poisonous atmosphere .
In fact , as I have long been convinced , though every profession is necessary and honourable in its turn , it is only the lot of those who are not obliged to follow any , who can live in a regular way , in the country , choosing their own hours , following their own pursuits , and living on their own property , without the torment of trying for more ; it is only their lot , I say , to hold the blessings of health and a good appearance to the utmost : I know no other set of men but what lose something of their personableness when they cease to be quite young . ''
It seemed as if Mr Shepherd , in this anxiety to bespeak Sir Walter 's good will towards a naval officer as tenant , had been gifted with foresight ; for the very first application for the house was from an Admiral Croft , with whom he shortly afterwards fell into company in attending the quarter sessions at Taunton ; and indeed , he had received a hint of the Admiral from a London correspondent .
By the report which he hastened over to Kellynch to make , Admiral Croft was a native of Somersetshire , who having acquired a very handsome fortune , was wishing to settle in his own country , and had come down to Taunton in order to look at some advertised places in that immediate neighbourhood , which , however , had not suited him ; that accidentally hearing -- ( it was just as he had foretold , Mr Shepherd observed , Sir Walter 's concerns could not be kept a secret , ) -- accidentally hearing of the possibility of Kellynch Hall being to let , and understanding his ( Mr Shepherd 's ) connection with the owner , he had introduced himself to him in order to make particular inquiries , and had , in the course of a pretty long conference , expressed as strong an inclination for the place as a man who knew it only by description could feel ; and given Mr Shepherd , in his explicit account of himself , every proof of his being a most responsible , eligible tenant .
`` And who is Admiral Croft ? ''
was Sir Walter 's cold suspicious inquiry .
Mr Shepherd answered for his being of a gentleman 's family , and mentioned a place ; and Anne , after the little pause which followed , added -- '' He is a rear admiral of the white .
He was in the Trafalgar action , and has been in the East Indies since ; he was stationed there , I believe , several years . ''
`` Then I take it for granted , '' observed Sir Walter , `` that his face is about as orange as the cuffs and capes of my livery . ''
Mr Shepherd hastened to assure him , that Admiral Croft was a very hale , hearty , well-looking man , a little weather-beaten , to be sure , but not much , and quite the gentleman in all his notions and behaviour ; not likely to make the smallest difficulty about terms , only wanted a comfortable home , and to get into it as soon as possible ; knew he must pay for his convenience ; knew what rent a ready-furnished house of that consequence might fetch ; should not have been surprised if Sir Walter had asked more ; had inquired about the manor ; would be glad of the deputation , certainly , but made no great point of it ; said he sometimes took out a gun , but never killed ; quite the gentleman .
Mr Shepherd was eloquent on the subject ; pointing out all the circumstances of the Admiral 's family , which made him peculiarly desirable as a tenant .
He was a married man , and without children ; the very state to be wished for .
A house was never taken good care of , Mr Shepherd observed , without a lady : he did not know , whether furniture might not be in danger of suffering as much where there was no lady , as where there were many children .
A lady , without a family , was the very best preserver of furniture in the world .
He had seen Mrs Croft , too ; she was at Taunton with the admiral , and had been present almost all the time they were talking the matter over .
`` And a very well-spoken , genteel , shrewd lady , she seemed to be , '' continued he ; `` asked more questions about the house , and terms , and taxes , than the Admiral himself , and seemed more conversant with business ; and moreover , Sir Walter , I found she was not quite unconnected in this country , any more than her husband ; that is to say , she is sister to a gentleman who did live amongst us once ; she told me so herself : sister to the gentleman who lived a few years back at Monkford .
Bless me !
what was his name ?
At this moment I can not recollect his name , though I have heard it so lately .
Penelope , my dear , can you help me to the name of the gentleman who lived at Monkford : Mrs Croft 's brother ? ''
But Mrs Clay was talking so eagerly with Miss Elliot , that she did not hear the appeal .
`` I have no conception whom you can mean , Shepherd ; I remember no gentleman resident at Monkford since the time of old Governor Trent . ''
`` Bless me !
how very odd !
I shall forget my own name soon , I suppose .
A name that I am so very well acquainted with ; knew the gentleman so well by sight ; seen him a hundred times ; came to consult me once , I remember , about a trespass of one of his neighbours ; farmer 's man breaking into his orchard ; wall torn down ; apples stolen ; caught in the fact ; and afterwards , contrary to my judgement , submitted to an amicable compromise .
Very odd indeed ! ''
After waiting another moment -- '' You mean Mr Wentworth , I suppose ? ''
said Anne .
Mr Shepherd was all gratitude .
`` Wentworth was the very name !
Mr Wentworth was the very man .
He had the curacy of Monkford , you know , Sir Walter , some time back , for two or three years .
Came there about the year -- -5 , I take it .
You remember him , I am sure . ''
`` Wentworth ?
Oh !
ay , -- Mr Wentworth , the curate of Monkford .
You misled me by the term gentleman .
I thought you were speaking of some man of property : Mr Wentworth was nobody , I remember ; quite unconnected ; nothing to do with the Strafford family .
One wonders how the names of many of our nobility become so common . ''
As Mr Shepherd perceived that this connexion of the Crofts did them no service with Sir Walter , he mentioned it no more ; returning , with all his zeal , to dwell on the circumstances more indisputably in their favour ; their age , and number , and fortune ; the high idea they had formed of Kellynch Hall , and extreme solicitude for the advantage of renting it ; making it appear as if they ranked nothing beyond the happiness of being the tenants of Sir Walter Elliot : an extraordinary taste , certainly , could they have been supposed in the secret of Sir Walter 's estimate of the dues of a tenant .
It succeeded , however ; and though Sir Walter must ever look with an evil eye on anyone intending to inhabit that house , and think them infinitely too well off in being permitted to rent it on the highest terms , he was talked into allowing Mr Shepherd to proceed in the treaty , and authorising him to wait on Admiral Croft , who still remained at Taunton , and fix a day for the house being seen .
Sir Walter was not very wise ; but still he had experience enough of the world to feel , that a more unobjectionable tenant , in all essentials , than Admiral Croft bid fair to be , could hardly offer .
So far went his understanding ; and his vanity supplied a little additional soothing , in the Admiral 's situation in life , which was just high enough , and not too high .
`` I have let my house to Admiral Croft , '' would sound extremely well ; very much better than to any mere Mr -- ; a Mr ( save , perhaps , some half dozen in the nation , ) always needs a note of explanation .
An admiral speaks his own consequence , and , at the same time , can never make a baronet look small .
In all their dealings and intercourse , Sir Walter Elliot must ever have the precedence .
Nothing could be done without a reference to Elizabeth : but her inclination was growing so strong for a removal , that she was happy to have it fixed and expedited by a tenant at hand ; and not a word to suspend decision was uttered by her .
Mr Shepherd was completely empowered to act ; and no sooner had such an end been reached , than Anne , who had been a most attentive listener to the whole , left the room , to seek the comfort of cool air for her flushed cheeks ; and as she walked along a favourite grove , said , with a gentle sigh , `` A few months more , and he , perhaps , may be walking here . ''
Chapter 4 He was not Mr Wentworth , the former curate of Monkford , however suspicious appearances may be , but a Captain Frederick Wentworth , his brother , who being made commander in consequence of the action off St Domingo , and not immediately employed , had come into Somersetshire , in the summer of 1806 ; and having no parent living , found a home for half a year at Monkford .
He was , at that time , a remarkably fine young man , with a great deal of intelligence , spirit , and brilliancy ; and Anne an extremely pretty girl , with gentleness , modesty , taste , and feeling .
Half the sum of attraction , on either side , might have been enough , for he had nothing to do , and she had hardly anybody to love ; but the encounter of such lavish recommendations could not fail .
They were gradually acquainted , and when acquainted , rapidly and deeply in love .
It would be difficult to say which had seen highest perfection in the other , or which had been the happiest : she , in receiving his declarations and proposals , or he in having them accepted .
A short period of exquisite felicity followed , and but a short one .
Troubles soon arose .
Sir Walter , on being applied to , without actually withholding his consent , or saying it should never be , gave it all the negative of great astonishment , great coldness , great silence , and a professed resolution of doing nothing for his daughter .
He thought it a very degrading alliance ; and Lady Russell , though with more tempered and pardonable pride , received it as a most unfortunate one .
Anne Elliot , with all her claims of birth , beauty , and mind , to throw herself away at nineteen ; involve herself at nineteen in an engagement with a young man , who had nothing but himself to recommend him , and no hopes of attaining affluence , but in the chances of a most uncertain profession , and no connexions to secure even his farther rise in the profession , would be , indeed , a throwing away , which she grieved to think of !
Anne Elliot , so young ; known to so few , to be snatched off by a stranger without alliance or fortune ; or rather sunk by him into a state of most wearing , anxious , youth-killing dependence !
It must not be , if by any fair interference of friendship , any representations from one who had almost a mother 's love , and mother 's rights , it would be prevented .
Captain Wentworth had no fortune .
He had been lucky in his profession ; but spending freely , what had come freely , had realized nothing .
But he was confident that he should soon be rich : full of life and ardour , he knew that he should soon have a ship , and soon be on a station that would lead to everything he wanted .
He had always been lucky ; he knew he should be so still .
Such confidence , powerful in its own warmth , and bewitching in the wit which often expressed it , must have been enough for Anne ; but Lady Russell saw it very differently .
His sanguine temper , and fearlessness of mind , operated very differently on her .
She saw in it but an aggravation of the evil .
It only added a dangerous character to himself .
He was brilliant , he was headstrong .
Lady Russell had little taste for wit , and of anything approaching to imprudence a horror .
She deprecated the connexion in every light .
Such opposition , as these feelings produced , was more than Anne could combat .
Young and gentle as she was , it might yet have been possible to withstand her father 's ill-will , though unsoftened by one kind word or look on the part of her sister ; but Lady Russell , whom she had always loved and relied on , could not , with such steadiness of opinion , and such tenderness of manner , be continually advising her in vain .
She was persuaded to believe the engagement a wrong thing : indiscreet , improper , hardly capable of success , and not deserving it .
But it was not a merely selfish caution , under which she acted , in putting an end to it .
Had she not imagined herself consulting his good , even more than her own , she could hardly have given him up .
The belief of being prudent , and self-denying , principally for his advantage , was her chief consolation , under the misery of a parting , a final parting ; and every consolation was required , for she had to encounter all the additional pain of opinions , on his side , totally unconvinced and unbending , and of his feeling himself ill used by so forced a relinquishment .
He had left the country in consequence .
A few months had seen the beginning and the end of their acquaintance ; but not with a few months ended Anne 's share of suffering from it .
Her attachment and regrets had , for a long time , clouded every enjoyment of youth , and an early loss of bloom and spirits had been their lasting effect .
More than seven years were gone since this little history of sorrowful interest had reached its close ; and time had softened down much , perhaps nearly all of peculiar attachment to him , but she had been too dependent on time alone ; no aid had been given in change of place ( except in one visit to Bath soon after the rupture ) , or in any novelty or enlargement of society .
No one had ever come within the Kellynch circle , who could bear a comparison with Frederick Wentworth , as he stood in her memory .
No second attachment , the only thoroughly natural , happy , and sufficient cure , at her time of life , had been possible to the nice tone of her mind , the fastidiousness of her taste , in the small limits of the society around them .
She had been solicited , when about two-and-twenty , to change her name , by the young man , who not long afterwards found a more willing mind in her younger sister ; and Lady Russell had lamented her refusal ; for Charles Musgrove was the eldest son of a man , whose landed property and general importance were second in that country , only to Sir Walter 's , and of good character and appearance ; and however Lady Russell might have asked yet for something more , while Anne was nineteen , she would have rejoiced to see her at twenty-two so respectably removed from the partialities and injustice of her father 's house , and settled so permanently near herself .
But in this case , Anne had left nothing for advice to do ; and though Lady Russell , as satisfied as ever with her own discretion , never wished the past undone , she began now to have the anxiety which borders on hopelessness for Anne 's being tempted , by some man of talents and independence , to enter a state for which she held her to be peculiarly fitted by her warm affections and domestic habits .
They knew not each other 's opinion , either its constancy or its change , on the one leading point of Anne 's conduct , for the subject was never alluded to ; but Anne , at seven-and-twenty , thought very differently from what she had been made to think at nineteen .
She did not blame Lady Russell , she did not blame herself for having been guided by her ; but she felt that were any young person , in similar circumstances , to apply to her for counsel , they would never receive any of such certain immediate wretchedness , such uncertain future good .
She was persuaded that under every disadvantage of disapprobation at home , and every anxiety attending his profession , all their probable fears , delays , and disappointments , she should yet have been a happier woman in maintaining the engagement , than she had been in the sacrifice of it ; and this , she fully believed , had the usual share , had even more than the usual share of all such solicitudes and suspense been theirs , without reference to the actual results of their case , which , as it happened , would have bestowed earlier prosperity than could be reasonably calculated on .
All his sanguine expectations , all his confidence had been justified .
His genius and ardour had seemed to foresee and to command his prosperous path .
He had , very soon after their engagement ceased , got employ : and all that he had told her would follow , had taken place .
He had distinguished himself , and early gained the other step in rank , and must now , by successive captures , have made a handsome fortune .
She had only navy lists and newspapers for her authority , but she could not doubt his being rich ; and , in favour of his constancy , she had no reason to believe him married .
How eloquent could Anne Elliot have been !
how eloquent , at least , were her wishes on the side of early warm attachment , and a cheerful confidence in futurity , against that over-anxious caution which seems to insult exertion and distrust Providence !
She had been forced into prudence in her youth , she learned romance as she grew older : the natural sequel of an unnatural beginning .
With all these circumstances , recollections and feelings , she could not hear that Captain Wentworth 's sister was likely to live at Kellynch without a revival of former pain ; and many a stroll , and many a sigh , were necessary to dispel the agitation of the idea .
She often told herself it was folly , before she could harden her nerves sufficiently to feel the continual discussion of the Crofts and their business no evil .
She was assisted , however , by that perfect indifference and apparent unconsciousness , among the only three of her own friends in the secret of the past , which seemed almost to deny any recollection of it .
She could do justice to the superiority of Lady Russell 's motives in this , over those of her father and Elizabeth ; she could honour all the better feelings of her calmness ; but the general air of oblivion among them was highly important from whatever it sprung ; and in the event of Admiral Croft 's really taking Kellynch Hall , she rejoiced anew over the conviction which had always been most grateful to her , of the past being known to those three only among her connexions , by whom no syllable , she believed , would ever be whispered , and in the trust that among his , the brother only with whom he had been residing , had received any information of their short-lived engagement .
That brother had been long removed from the country and being a sensible man , and , moreover , a single man at the time , she had a fond dependence on no human creature's having heard of it from him .
The sister , Mrs Croft , had then been out of England , accompanying her husband on a foreign station , and her own sister , Mary , had been at school while it all occurred ; and never admitted by the pride of some , and the delicacy of others , to the smallest knowledge of it afterwards .
With these supports , she hoped that the acquaintance between herself and the Crofts , which , with Lady Russell , still resident in Kellynch , and Mary fixed only three miles off , must be anticipated , need not involve any particular awkwardness .
Chapter 5 On the morning appointed for Admiral and Mrs Croft 's seeing Kellynch Hall , Anne found it most natural to take her almost daily walk to Lady Russell 's , and keep out of the way till all was over ; when she found it most natural to be sorry that she had missed the opportunity of seeing them .
This meeting of the two parties proved highly satisfactory , and decided the whole business at once .
Each lady was previously well disposed for an agreement , and saw nothing , therefore , but good manners in the other ; and with regard to the gentlemen , there was such an hearty good humour , such an open , trusting liberality on the Admiral 's side , as could not but influence Sir Walter , who had besides been flattered into his very best and most polished behaviour by Mr Shepherd 's assurances of his being known , by report , to the Admiral , as a model of good breeding .
The house and grounds , and furniture , were approved , the Crofts were approved , terms , time , every thing , and every body , was right ; and Mr Shepherd 's clerks were set to work , without there having been a single preliminary difference to modify of all that '' This indenture sheweth . ''
Sir Walter , without hesitation , declared the Admiral to be the best-looking sailor he had ever met with , and went so far as to say , that if his own man might have had the arranging of his hair , he should not be ashamed of being seen with him any where ; and the Admiral , with sympathetic cordiality , observed to his wife as they drove back through the park , `` I thought we should soon come to a deal , my dear , in spite of what they told us at Taunton .
The Baronet will never set the Thames on fire , but there seems to be no harm in him . ''
reciprocal compliments , which would have been esteemed about equal .
The Crofts were to have possession at Michaelmas ; and as Sir Walter proposed removing to Bath in the course of the preceding month , there was no time to be lost in making every dependent arrangement .
Lady Russell , convinced that Anne would not be allowed to be of any use , or any importance , in the choice of the house which they were going to secure , was very unwilling to have her hurried away so soon , and wanted to make it possible for her to stay behind till she might convey her to Bath herself after Christmas ; but having engagements of her own which must take her from Kellynch for several weeks , she was unable to give the full invitation she wished , and Anne though dreading the possible heats of September in all the white glare of Bath , and grieving to forego all the influence so sweet and so sad of the autumnal months in the country , did not think that , everything considered , she wished to remain .
It would be most right , and most wise , and , therefore must involve least suffering to go with the others .
Something occurred , however , to give her a different duty .
Mary , often a little unwell , and always thinking a great deal of her own complaints , and always in the habit of claiming Anne when anything was the matter , was indisposed ; and foreseeing that she should not have a day 's health all the autumn , entreated , or rather required her , for it was hardly entreaty , to come to Uppercross Cottage , and bear her company as long as she should want her , instead of going to Bath .
`` I can not possibly do without Anne , '' was Mary 's reasoning ; and Elizabeth 's reply was , `` Then I am sure Anne had better stay , for nobody will want her in Bath . ''
To be claimed as a good , though in an improper style , is at least better than being rejected as no good at all ; and Anne , glad to be thought of some use , glad to have anything marked out as a duty , and certainly not sorry to have the scene of it in the country , and her own dear country , readily agreed to stay .
This invitation of Mary 's removed all Lady Russell 's difficulties , and it was consequently soon settled that Anne should not go to Bath till Lady Russell took her , and that all the intervening time should be divided between Uppercross Cottage and Kellynch Lodge .
So far all was perfectly right ; but Lady Russell was almost startled by the wrong of one part of the Kellynch Hall plan , when it burst on her , which was , Mrs Clay 's being engaged to go to Bath with Sir Walter and Elizabeth , as a most important and valuable assistant to the latter in all the business before her .
Lady Russell was extremely sorry that such a measure should have been resorted to at all , wondered , grieved , and feared ; and the affront it contained to Anne , in Mrs Clay 's being of so much use , while Anne could be of none , was a very sore aggravation .
Anne herself was become hardened to such affronts ; but she felt the imprudence of the arrangement quite as keenly as Lady Russell .
With a great deal of quiet observation , and a knowledge , which she often wished less , of her father 's character , she was sensible that results the most serious to his family from the intimacy were more than possible .
She did not imagine that her father had at present an idea of the kind .
Mrs Clay had freckles , and a projecting tooth , and a clumsy wrist , which he was continually making severe remarks upon , in her absence ; but she was young , and certainly altogether well-looking , and possessed , in an acute mind and assiduous pleasing manners , infinitely more dangerous attractions than any merely personal might have been .
Anne was so impressed by the degree of their danger , that she could not excuse herself from trying to make it perceptible to her sister .
She had little hope of success ; but Elizabeth , who in the event of such a reverse would be so much more to be pitied than herself , should never , she thought , have reason to reproach her for giving no warning .
She spoke , and seemed only to offend .
Elizabeth could not conceive how such an absurd suspicion should occur to her , and indignantly answered for each party 's perfectly knowing their situation .
`` Mrs Clay , '' said she , warmly , `` never forgets who she is ; and as I am rather better acquainted with her sentiments than you can be , I can assure you , that upon the subject of marriage they are particularly nice , and that she reprobates all inequality of condition and rank more strongly than most people .
And as to my father , I really should not have thought that he , who has kept himself single so long for our sakes , need be suspected now .
If Mrs Clay were a very beautiful woman , I grant you , it might be wrong to have her so much with me ; not that anything in the world , I am sure , would induce my father to make a degrading match , but he might be rendered unhappy .
But poor Mrs Clay who , with all her merits , can never have been reckoned tolerably pretty , I really think poor Mrs Clay may be staying here in perfect safety .
One would imagine you had never heard my father speak of her personal misfortunes , though I know you must fifty times .
That tooth of her's and those freckles .
Freckles do not disgust me so very much as they do him .
I have known a face not materially disfigured by a few , but he abominates them .
You must have heard him notice Mrs Clay 's freckles . ''
`` There is hardly any personal defect , '' replied Anne , '' which an agreeable manner might not gradually reconcile one to . ''
`` I think very differently , '' answered Elizabeth , shortly ; '' an agreeable manner may set off handsome features , but can never alter plain ones .
However , at any rate , as I have a great deal more at stake on this point than anybody else can have , I think it rather unnecessary in you to be advising me . ''
Anne had done ; glad that it was over , and not absolutely hopeless of doing good .
Elizabeth , though resenting the suspicion , might yet be made observant by it .
The last office of the four carriage-horses was to draw Sir Walter , Miss Elliot , and Mrs Clay to Bath .
The party drove off in very good spirits ; Sir Walter prepared with condescending bows for all the afflicted tenantry and cottagers who might have had a hint to show themselves , and Anne walked up at the same time , in a sort of desolate tranquillity , to the Lodge , where she was to spend the first week .
Her friend was not in better spirits than herself .
Lady Russell felt this break-up of the family exceedingly .
Their respectability was as dear to her as her own , and a daily intercourse had become precious by habit .
It was painful to look upon their deserted grounds , and still worse to anticipate the new hands they were to fall into ; and to escape the solitariness and the melancholy of so altered a village , and be out of the way when Admiral and Mrs Croft first arrived , she had determined to make her own absence from home begin when she must give up Anne .
Accordingly their removal was made together , and Anne was set down at Uppercross Cottage , in the first stage of Lady Russell 's journey .
Uppercross was a moderate-sized village , which a few years back had been completely in the old English style , containing only two houses superior in appearance to those of the yeomen and labourers ; the mansion of the squire , with its high walls , great gates , and old trees , substantial and unmodernized , and the compact , tight parsonage , enclosed in its own neat garden , with a vine and a pear-tree trained round its casements ; but upon the marriage of the young 'squire , it had received the improvement of a farm-house elevated into a cottage , for his residence , and Uppercross Cottage , with its veranda , French windows , and other prettiness , was quite as likely to catch the traveller 's eye as the more consistent and considerable aspect and premises of the Great House , about a quarter of a mile farther on .
Here Anne had often been staying .
She knew the ways of Uppercross as well as those of Kellynch .
The two families were so continually meeting , so much in the habit of running in and out of each other 's house at all hours , that it was rather a surprise to her to find Mary alone ; but being alone , her being unwell and out of spirits was almost a matter of course .
Though better endowed than the elder sister , Mary had not Anne 's understanding nor temper .
While well , and happy , and properly attended to , she had great good humour and excellent spirits ; but any indisposition sunk her completely .
She had no resources for solitude ; and inheriting a considerable share of the Elliot self-importance , was very prone to add to every other distress that of fancying herself neglected and ill-used .
In person , she was inferior to both sisters , and had , even in her bloom , only reached the dignity of being `` a fine girl . ''
She was now lying on the faded sofa of the pretty little drawing-room , the once elegant furniture of which had been gradually growing shabby , under the influence of four summers and two children ; and , on Anne 's appearing , greeted her with -- '' So , you are come at last !
I began to think I should never see you .
I am so ill I can hardly speak .
I have not seen a creature the whole morning ! ''
`` I am sorry to find you unwell , '' replied Anne .
`` You sent me such a good account of yourself on Thursday ! ''
`` Yes , I made the best of it ; I always do : but I was very far from well at the time ; and I do not think I ever was so ill in my life as I have been all this morning : very unfit to be left alone , I am sure .
Suppose I were to be seized of a sudden in some dreadful way , and not able to ring the bell !
So , Lady Russell would not get out .
I do not think she has been in this house three times this summer . ''
Anne said what was proper , and enquired after her husband .
`` Oh !
Charles is out shooting .
I have not seen him since seven o'clock .
He would go , though I told him how ill I was .
He said he should not stay out long ; but he has never come back , and now it is almost one .
I assure you , I have not seen a soul this whole long morning . ''
`` You have had your little boys with you ? ''
`` Yes , as long as I could bear their noise ; but they are so unmanageable that they do me more harm than good .
Little Charles does not mind a word I say , and Walter is growing quite as bad . ''
`` Well , you will soon be better now , '' replied Anne , cheerfully .
`` You know I always cure you when I come .
How are your neighbours at the Great House ? ''
`` I can give you no account of them .
I have not seen one of them to-day , except Mr Musgrove , who just stopped and spoke through the window , but without getting off his horse ; and though I told him how ill I was , not one of them have been near me .
It did not happen to suit the Miss Musgroves , I suppose , and they never put themselves out of their way . ''
`` You will see them yet , perhaps , before the morning is gone .
It is early . ''
`` I never want them , I assure you .
They talk and laugh a great deal too much for me .
Oh !
Anne , I am so very unwell !
It was quite unkind of you not to come on Thursday . ''
`` My dear Mary , recollect what a comfortable account you sent me of yourself !
You wrote in the cheerfullest manner , and said you were perfectly well , and in no hurry for me ; and that being the case , you must be aware that my wish would be to remain with Lady Russell to the last : and besides what I felt on her account , I have really been so busy , have had so much to do , that I could not very conveniently have left Kellynch sooner . ''
`` Dear me !
what can you possibly have to do ? ''
`` A great many things , I assure you .
More than I can recollect in a moment ; but I can tell you some .
I have been making a duplicate of the catalogue of my father 's books and pictures .
I have been several times in the garden with Mackenzie , trying to understand , and make him understand , which of Elizabeth 's plants are for Lady Russell .
I have had all my own little concerns to arrange , books and music to divide , and all my trunks to repack , from not having understood in time what was intended as to the waggons : and one thing I have had to do , Mary , of a more trying nature : going to almost every house in the parish , as a sort of take-leave .
I was told that they wished it .
But all these things took up a great deal of time . ''
`` Oh !
well ! ''
and after a moment 's pause , `` but you have never asked me one word about our dinner at the Pooles yesterday . ''
`` Did you go then ?
I have made no enquiries , because I concluded you must have been obliged to give up the party . ''
`` Oh yes !
I went .
I was very well yesterday ; nothing at all the matter with me till this morning .
It would have been strange if I had not gone . ''
`` I am very glad you were well enough , and I hope you had a pleasant party . ''
`` Nothing remarkable .
One always knows beforehand what the dinner will be , and who will be there ; and it is so very uncomfortable not having a carriage of one 's own .
Mr and Mrs Musgrove took me , and we were so crowded !
They are both so very large , and take up so much room ; and Mr Musgrove always sits forward .
So , there was I , crowded into the back seat with Henrietta and Louise ; and I think it very likely that my illness to-day may be owing to it . ''
A little further perseverance in patience and forced cheerfulness on Anne 's side produced nearly a cure on Mary 's .
She could soon sit upright on the sofa , and began to hope she might be able to leave it by dinner-time .
Then , forgetting to think of it , she was at the other end of the room , beautifying a nosegay ; then , she ate her cold meat ; and then she was well enough to propose a little walk .
`` Where shall we go ? ''
said she , when they were ready .
`` I suppose you will not like to call at the Great House before they have been to see you ? ''
`` I have not the smallest objection on that account , '' replied Anne .
`` I should never think of standing on such ceremony with people I know so well as Mrs and the Miss Musgroves . ''
`` Oh !
but they ought to call upon you as soon as possible .
They ought to feel what is due to you as my sister .
However , we may as well go and sit with them a little while , and when we have that over , we can enjoy our walk . ''
Anne had always thought such a style of intercourse highly imprudent ; but she had ceased to endeavour to check it , from believing that , though there were on each side continual subjects of offence , neither family could now do without it .
To the Great House accordingly they went , to sit the full half hour in the old-fashioned square parlour , with a small carpet and shining floor , to which the present daughters of the house were gradually giving the proper air of confusion by a grand piano-forte and a harp , flower-stands and little tables placed in every direction .
Oh !
could the originals of the portraits against the wainscot , could the gentlemen in brown velvet and the ladies in blue satin have seen what was going on , have been conscious of such an overthrow of all order and neatness !
The portraits themselves seemed to be staring in astonishment .
The Musgroves , like their houses , were in a state of alteration , perhaps of improvement .
The father and mother were in the old English style , and the young people in the new .
Mr and Mrs Musgrove were a very good sort of people ; friendly and hospitable , not much educated , and not at all elegant .
Their children had more modern minds and manners .
There was a numerous family ; but the only two grown up , excepting Charles , were Henrietta and Louisa , young ladies of nineteen and twenty , who had brought from school at Exeter all the usual stock of accomplishments , and were now like thousands of other young ladies , living to be fashionable , happy , and merry .
Their dress had every advantage , their faces were rather pretty , their spirits extremely good , their manner unembarrassed and pleasant ; they were of consequence at home , and favourites abroad .
Anne always contemplated them as some of the happiest creatures of her acquaintance ; but still , saved as we all are , by some comfortable feeling of superiority from wishing for the possibility of exchange , she would not have given up her own more elegant and cultivated mind for all their enjoyments ; and envied them nothing but that seemingly perfect good understanding and agreement together , that good-humoured mutual affection , of which she had known so little herself with either of her sisters .
They were received with great cordiality .
Nothing seemed amiss on the side of the Great House family , which was generally , as Anne very well knew , the least to blame .
The half hour was chatted away pleasantly enough ; and she was not at all surprised at the end of it , to have their walking party joined by both the Miss Musgroves , at Mary 's particular invitation .
Chapter 6 Anne had not wanted this visit to Uppercross , to learn that a removal from one set of people to another , though at a distance of only three miles , will often include a total change of conversation , opinion , and idea .
She had never been staying there before , without being struck by it , or without wishing that other Elliots could have her advantage in seeing how unknown , or unconsidered there , were the affairs which at Kellynch Hall were treated as of such general publicity and pervading interest ; yet , with all this experience , she believed she must now submit to feel that another lesson , in the art of knowing our own nothingness beyond our own circle , was become necessary for her ; for certainly , coming as she did , with a heart full of the subject which had been completely occupying both houses in Kellynch for many weeks , she had expected rather more curiosity and sympathy than she found in the separate but very similar remark of Mr and Mrs Musgrove : '' So , Miss Anne , Sir Walter and your sister are gone ; and what part of Bath do you think they will settle in ? ''
and this , without much waiting for an answer ; or in the young ladies ' addition of , '' I hope we shall be in Bath in the winter ; but remember , papa , if we do go , we must be in a good situation : none of your Queen Squares for us ! ''
or in the anxious supplement from Mary , of -- '' Upon my word , I shall be pretty well off , when you are all gone away to be happy at Bath ! ''
She could only resolve to avoid such self-delusion in future , and think with heightened gratitude of the extraordinary blessing of having one such truly sympathising friend as Lady Russell .
The Mr Musgroves had their own game to guard , and to destroy , their own horses , dogs , and newspapers to engage them , and the females were fully occupied in all the other common subjects of housekeeping , neighbours , dress , dancing , and music .
She acknowledged it to be very fitting , that every little social commonwealth should dictate its own matters of discourse ; and hoped , ere long , to become a not unworthy member of the one she was now transplanted into .
With the prospect of spending at least two months at Uppercross , it was highly incumbent on her to clothe her imagination , her memory , and all her ideas in as much of Uppercross as possible .
She had no dread of these two months .
Mary was not so repulsive and unsisterly as Elizabeth , nor so inaccessible to all influence of hers ; neither was there anything among the other component parts of the cottage inimical to comfort .
She was always on friendly terms with her brother-in-law ; and in the children , who loved her nearly as well , and respected her a great deal more than their mother , she had an object of interest , amusement , and wholesome exertion .
Charles Musgrove was civil and agreeable ; in sense and temper he was undoubtedly superior to his wife , but not of powers , or conversation , or grace , to make the past , as they were connected together , at all a dangerous contemplation ; though , at the same time , Anne could believe , with Lady Russell , that a more equal match might have greatly improved him ; and that a woman of real understanding might have given more consequence to his character , and more usefulness , rationality , and elegance to his habits and pursuits .
As it was , he did nothing with much zeal , but sport ; and his time was otherwise trifled away , without benefit from books or anything else .
He had very good spirits , which never seemed much affected by his wife 's occasional lowness , bore with her unreasonableness sometimes to Anne 's admiration , and upon the whole , though there was very often a little disagreement ( in which she had sometimes more share than she wished , being appealed to by both parties ) , they might pass for a happy couple .
They were always perfectly agreed in the want of more money , and a strong inclination for a handsome present from his father ; but here , as on most topics , he had the superiority , for while Mary thought it a great shame that such a present was not made , he always contended for his father 's having many other uses for his money , and a right to spend it as he liked .
As to the management of their children , his theory was much better than his wife 's , and his practice not so bad .
`` I could manage them very well , if it were not for Mary 's interference , '' was what Anne often heard him say , and had a good deal of faith in ; but when listening in turn to Mary 's reproach of `` Charles spoils the children so that I can not get them into any order , '' she never had the smallest temptation to say , `` Very true . ''
One of the least agreeable circumstances of her residence there was her being treated with too much confidence by all parties , and being too much in the secret of the complaints of each house .
Known to have some influence with her sister , she was continually requested , or at least receiving hints to exert it , beyond what was practicable .
`` I wish you could persuade Mary not to be always fancying herself ill , '' was Charles 's language ; and , in an unhappy mood , thus spoke Mary : '' I do believe if Charles were to see me dying , he would not think there was anything the matter with me .
I am sure , Anne , if you would , you might persuade him that I really am very ill -- a great deal worse than I ever own . ''
Mary 's declaration was , `` I hate sending the children to the Great House , though their grandmamma is always wanting to see them , for she humours and indulges them to such a degree , and gives them so much trash and sweet things , that they are sure to come back sick and cross for the rest of the day . ''
And Mrs Musgrove took the first opportunity of being alone with Anne , to say , `` Oh !
Miss Anne , I can not help wishing Mrs Charles had a little of your method with those children .
They are quite different creatures with you !
But to be sure , in general they are so spoilt !
It is a pity you can not put your sister in the way of managing them .
They are as fine healthy children as ever were seen , poor little dears !
without partiality ; but Mrs Charles knows no more how they should be treated -- !
Bless me !
how troublesome they are sometimes .
I assure you , Miss Anne , it prevents my wishing to see them at our house so often as I otherwise should .
I believe Mrs Charles is not quite pleased with my not inviting them oftener ; but you know it is very bad to have children with one that one is obligated to be checking every moment ; `` do n't do this , '' and `` do n't do that ; '' or that one can only keep in tolerable order by more cake than is good for them . ''
She had this communication , moreover , from Mary .
`` Mrs Musgrove thinks all her servants so steady , that it would be high treason to call it in question ; but I am sure , without exaggeration , that her upper house-maid and laundry-maid , instead of being in their business , are gadding about the village , all day long .
I meet them wherever I go ; and I declare , I never go twice into my nursery without seeing something of them .
If Jemima were not the trustiest , steadiest creature in the world , it would be enough to spoil her ; for she tells me , they are always tempting her to take a walk with them . ''
And on Mrs Musgrove 's side , it was , `` I make a rule of never interfering in any of my daughter-in-law 's concerns , for I know it would not do ; but I shall tell you , Miss Anne , because you may be able to set things to rights , that I have no very good opinion of Mrs Charles 's nursery-maid : I hear strange stories of her ; she is always upon the gad ; and from my own knowledge , I can declare , she is such a fine-dressing lady , that she is enough to ruin any servants she comes near .
Mrs Charles quite swears by her , I know ; but I just give you this hint , that you may be upon the watch ; because , if you see anything amiss , you need not be afraid of mentioning it . ''
Again , it was Mary 's complaint , that Mrs Musgrove was very apt not to give her the precedence that was her due , when they dined at the Great House with other families ; and she did not see any reason why she was to be considered so much at home as to lose her place .
And one day when Anne was walking with only the Musgroves , one of them after talking of rank , people of rank , and jealousy of rank , said , '' I have no scruple of observing to you , how nonsensical some persons are about their place , because all the world knows how easy and indifferent you are about it ; but I wish anybody could give Mary a hint that it would be a great deal better if she were not so very tenacious , especially if she would not be always putting herself forward to take place of mamma .
Nobody doubts her right to have precedence of mamma , but it would be more becoming in her not to be always insisting on it .
It is not that mamma cares about it the least in the world , but I know it is taken notice of by many persons . ''
How was Anne to set all these matters to rights ?
She could do little more than listen patiently , soften every grievance , and excuse each to the other ; give them all hints of the forbearance necessary between such near neighbours , and make those hints broadest which were meant for her sister 's benefit .
In all other respects , her visit began and proceeded very well .
Her own spirits improved by change of place and subject , by being removed three miles from Kellynch ; Mary 's ailments lessened by having a constant companion , and their daily intercourse with the other family , since there was neither superior affection , confidence , nor employment in the cottage , to be interrupted by it , was rather an advantage .
It was certainly carried nearly as far as possible , for they met every morning , and hardly ever spent an evening asunder ; but she believed they should not have done so well without the sight of Mr and Mrs Musgrove 's respectable forms in the usual places , or without the talking , laughing , and singing of their daughters .
She played a great deal better than either of the Miss Musgroves , but having no voice , no knowledge of the harp , and no fond parents , to sit by and fancy themselves delighted , her performance was little thought of , only out of civility , or to refresh the others , as she was well aware .
She knew that when she played she was giving pleasure only to herself ; but this was no new sensation .
Excepting one short period of her life , she had never , since the age of fourteen , never since the loss of her dear mother , known the happiness of being listened to , or encouraged by any just appreciation or real taste .
In music she had been always used to feel alone in the world ; and Mr and Mrs Musgrove 's fond partiality for their own daughters' performance , and total indifference to any other person 's , gave her much more pleasure for their sakes , than mortification for her own .
The party at the Great House was sometimes increased by other company .
The neighbourhood was not large , but the Musgroves were visited by everybody , and had more dinner-parties , and more callers , more visitors by invitation and by chance , than any other family .
There were more completely popular .
The girls were wild for dancing ; and the evenings ended , occasionally , in an unpremeditated little ball .
There was a family of cousins within a walk of Uppercross , in less affluent circumstances , who depended on the Musgroves for all their pleasures : they would come at any time , and help play at anything , or dance anywhere ; and Anne , very much preferring the office of musician to a more active post , played country dances to them by the hour together ; a kindness which always recommended her musical powers to the notice of Mr and Mrs Musgrove more than anything else , and often drew this compliment ; -- '' Well done , Miss Anne !
very well done indeed !
Lord bless me !
how those little fingers of yours fly about ! ''
So passed the first three weeks .
Michaelmas came ; and now Anne 's heart must be in Kellynch again .
A beloved home made over to others ; all the precious rooms and furniture , groves , and prospects , beginning to own other eyes and other limbs !
She could not think of much else on the 29th of September ; and she had this sympathetic touch in the evening from Mary , who , on having occasion to note down the day of the month , exclaimed , `` Dear me , is not this the day the Crofts were to come to Kellynch ?
I am glad I did not think of it before .
How low it makes me ! ''
The Crofts took possession with true naval alertness , and were to be visited .
Mary deplored the necessity for herself .
`` Nobody knew how much she should suffer .
She should put it off as long as she could ; '' but was not easy till she had talked Charles into driving her over on an early day , and was in a very animated , comfortable state of imaginary agitation , when she came back .
Anne had very sincerely rejoiced in there being no means of her going .
She wished , however to see the Crofts , and was glad to be within when the visit was returned .
They came : the master of the house was not at home , but the two sisters were together ; and as it chanced that Mrs Croft fell to the share of Anne , while the Admiral sat by Mary , and made himself very agreeable by his good-humoured notice of her little boys , she was well able to watch for a likeness , and if it failed her in the features , to catch it in the voice , or in the turn of sentiment and expression .
Mrs Croft , though neither tall nor fat , had a squareness , uprightness , and vigour of form , which gave importance to her person .
She had bright dark eyes , good teeth , and altogether an agreeable face ; though her reddened and weather-beaten complexion , the consequence of her having been almost as much at sea as her husband , made her seem to have lived some years longer in the world than her real eight-and-thirty .
Her manners were open , easy , and decided , like one who had no distrust of herself , and no doubts of what to do ; without any approach to coarseness , however , or any want of good humour .
Anne gave her credit , indeed , for feelings of great consideration towards herself , in all that related to Kellynch , and it pleased her : especially , as she had satisfied herself in the very first half minute , in the instant even of introduction , that there was not the smallest symptom of any knowledge or suspicion on Mrs Croft 's side , to give a bias of any sort .
She was quite easy on that head , and consequently full of strength and courage , till for a moment electrified by Mrs Croft 's suddenly saying , -- '' It was you , and not your sister , I find , that my brother had the pleasure of being acquainted with , when he was in this country . ''
Anne hoped she had outlived the age of blushing ; but the age of emotion she certainly had not .
`` Perhaps you may not have heard that he is married ? ''
added Mrs Croft .
She could now answer as she ought ; and was happy to feel , when Mrs Croft 's next words explained it to be Mr Wentworth of whom she spoke , that she had said nothing which might not do for either brother .
She immediately felt how reasonable it was , that Mrs Croft should be thinking and speaking of Edward , and not of Frederick ; and with shame at her own forgetfulness applied herself to the knowledge of their former neighbour's present state with proper interest .
The rest was all tranquillity ; till , just as they were moving , she heard the Admiral say to Mary -- '' We are expecting a brother of Mrs Croft 's here soon ; I dare say you know him by name . ''
He was cut short by the eager attacks of the little boys , clinging to him like an old friend , and declaring he should not go ; and being too much engrossed by proposals of carrying them away in his coat pockets , & c. , to have another moment for finishing or recollecting what he had begun , Anne was left to persuade herself , as well as she could , that the same brother must still be in question .
She could not , however , reach such a degree of certainty , as not to be anxious to hear whether anything had been said on the subject at the other house , where the Crofts had previously been calling .
The folks of the Great House were to spend the evening of this day at the Cottage ; and it being now too late in the year for such visits to be made on foot , the coach was beginning to be listened for , when the youngest Miss Musgrove walked in .
That she was coming to apologize , and that they should have to spend the evening by themselves , was the first black idea ; and Mary was quite ready to be affronted , when Louisa made all right by saying , that she only came on foot , to leave more room for the harp , which was bringing in the carriage .
`` And I will tell you our reason , '' she added , `` and all about it .
I am come on to give you notice , that papa and mamma are out of spirits this evening , especially mamma ; she is thinking so much of poor Richard !
And we agreed it would be best to have the harp , for it seems to amuse her more than the piano-forte .
I will tell you why she is out of spirits .
When the Crofts called this morning , ( they called here afterwards , did not they ?
) , they happened to say , that her brother , Captain Wentworth , is just returned to England , or paid off , or something , and is coming to see them almost directly ; and most unluckily it came into mamma 's head , when they were gone , that Wentworth , or something very like it , was the name of poor Richard 's captain at one time ; I do not know when or where , but a great while before he died , poor fellow !
And upon looking over his letters and things , she found it was so , and is perfectly sure that this must be the very man , and her head is quite full of it , and of poor Richard !
So we must be as merry as we can , that she may not be dwelling upon such gloomy things . ''
The real circumstances of this pathetic piece of family history were , that the Musgroves had had the ill fortune of a very troublesome , hopeless son ; and the good fortune to lose him before he reached his twentieth year ; that he had been sent to sea because he was stupid and unmanageable on shore ; that he had been very little cared for at any time by his family , though quite as much as he deserved ; seldom heard of , and scarcely at all regretted , when the intelligence of his death abroad had worked its way to Uppercross , two years before .
He had , in fact , though his sisters were now doing all they could for him , by calling him `` poor Richard , '' been nothing better than a thick-headed , unfeeling , unprofitable Dick Musgrove , who had never done anything to entitle himself to more than the abbreviation of his name , living or dead .
He had been several years at sea , and had , in the course of those removals to which all midshipmen are liable , and especially such midshipmen as every captain wishes to get rid of , been six months on board Captain Frederick Wentworth 's frigate , the Laconia ; and from the Laconia he had , under the influence of his captain , written the only two letters which his father and mother had ever received from him during the whole of his absence ; that is to say , the only two disinterested letters ; all the rest had been mere applications for money .
In each letter he had spoken well of his captain ; but yet , so little were they in the habit of attending to such matters , so unobservant and incurious were they as to the names of men or ships , that it had made scarcely any impression at the time ; and that Mrs Musgrove should have been suddenly struck , this very day , with a recollection of the name of Wentworth , as connected with her son , seemed one of those extraordinary bursts of mind which do sometimes occur .
She had gone to her letters , and found it all as she supposed ; and the re-perusal of these letters , after so long an interval , her poor son gone for ever , and all the strength of his faults forgotten , had affected her spirits exceedingly , and thrown her into greater grief for him than she had know on first hearing of his death .
Mr Musgrove was , in a lesser degree , affected likewise ; and when they reached the cottage , they were evidently in want , first , of being listened to anew on this subject , and afterwards , of all the relief which cheerful companions could give them .
To hear them talking so much of Captain Wentworth , repeating his name so often , puzzling over past years , and at last ascertaining that it might , that it probably would , turn out to be the very same Captain Wentworth whom they recollected meeting , once or twice , after their coming back from Clifton -- a very fine young man -- but they could not say whether it was seven or eight years ago , was a new sort of trial to Anne 's nerves .
She found , however , that it was one to which she must inure herself .
Since he actually was expected in the country , she must teach herself to be insensible on such points .
And not only did it appear that he was expected , and speedily , but the Musgroves , in their warm gratitude for the kindness he had shewn poor Dick , and very high respect for his character , stamped as it was by poor Dick 's having been six months under his care , and mentioning him in strong , though not perfectly well-spelt praise , as `` a fine dashing felow , only two perticular about the schoolmaster , '' were bent on introducing themselves , and seeking his acquaintance , as soon as they could hear of his arrival .
The resolution of doing so helped to form the comfort of their evening .
Chapter 7 A very few days more , and Captain Wentworth was known to be at Kellynch , and Mr Musgrove had called on him , and come back warm in his praise , and he was engaged with the Crofts to dine at Uppercross , by the end of another week .
It had been a great disappointment to Mr Musgrove to find that no earlier day could be fixed , so impatient was he to shew his gratitude , by seeing Captain Wentworth under his own roof , and welcoming him to all that was strongest and best in his cellars .
But a week must pass ; only a week , in Anne 's reckoning , and then , she supposed , they must meet ; and soon she began to wish that she could feel secure even for a week .
Captain Wentworth made a very early return to Mr Musgrove 's civility , and she was all but calling there in the same half hour .
She and Mary were actually setting forward for the Great House , where , as she afterwards learnt , they must inevitably have found him , when they were stopped by the eldest boy 's being at that moment brought home in consequence of a bad fall .
The child 's situation put the visit entirely aside ; but she could not hear of her escape with indifference , even in the midst of the serious anxiety which they afterwards felt on his account .
His collar-bone was found to be dislocated , and such injury received in the back , as roused the most alarming ideas .
It was an afternoon of distress , and Anne had every thing to do at once ; the apothecary to send for , the father to have pursued and informed , the mother to support and keep from hysterics , the servants to control , the youngest child to banish , and the poor suffering one to attend and soothe ; besides sending , as soon as she recollected it , proper notice to the other house , which brought her an accession rather of frightened , enquiring companions , than of very useful assistants .
Her brother 's return was the first comfort ; he could take best care of his wife ; and the second blessing was the arrival of the apothecary .
Till he came and had examined the child , their apprehensions were the worse for being vague ; they suspected great injury , but knew not where ; but now the collar-bone was soon replaced , and though Mr Robinson felt and felt , and rubbed , and looked grave , and spoke low words both to the father and the aunt , still they were all to hope the best , and to be able to part and eat their dinner in tolerable ease of mind ; and then it was , just before they parted , that the two young aunts were able so far to digress from their nephew 's state , as to give the information of Captain Wentworth 's visit ; staying five minutes behind their father and mother , to endeavour to express how perfectly delighted they were with him , how much handsomer , how infinitely more agreeable they thought him than any individual among their male acquaintance , who had been at all a favourite before .
How glad they had been to hear papa invite him to stay dinner , how sorry when he said it was quite out of his power , and how glad again when he had promised in reply to papa and mamma 's farther pressing invitations to come and dine with them on the morrow -- actually on the morrow ; and he had promised it in so pleasant a manner , as if he felt all the motive of their attention just as he ought .
And in short , he had looked and said everything with such exquisite grace , that they could assure them all , their heads were both turned by him ; and off they ran , quite as full of glee as of love , and apparently more full of Captain Wentworth than of little Charles .
The same story and the same raptures were repeated , when the two girls came with their father , through the gloom of the evening , to make enquiries ; and Mr Musgrove , no longer under the first uneasiness about his heir , could add his confirmation and praise , and hope there would be now no occasion for putting Captain Wentworth off , and only be sorry to think that the cottage party , probably , would not like to leave the little boy , to give him the meeting .
`` Oh no ; as to leaving the little boy , '' both father and mother were in much too strong and recent alarm to bear the thought ; and Anne , in the joy of the escape , could not help adding her warm protestations to theirs .
Charles Musgrove , indeed , afterwards , shewed more of inclination ; '' the child was going on so well , and he wished so much to be introduced to Captain Wentworth , that , perhaps , he might join them in the evening ; he would not dine from home , but he might walk in for half an hour . ''
But in this he was eagerly opposed by his wife , with `` Oh !
no , indeed , Charles , I can not bear to have you go away .
Only think if anything should happen ? ''
The child had a good night , and was going on well the next day .
It must be a work of time to ascertain that no injury had been done to the spine ; but Mr Robinson found nothing to increase alarm , and Charles Musgrove began , consequently , to feel no necessity for longer confinement .
The child was to be kept in bed and amused as quietly as possible ; but what was there for a father to do ?
This was quite a female case , and it would be highly absurd in him , who could be of no use at home , to shut himself up .
His father very much wished him to meet Captain Wentworth , and there being no sufficient reason against it , he ought to go ; and it ended in his making a bold , public declaration , when he came in from shooting , of his meaning to dress directly , and dine at the other house .
`` Nothing can be going on better than the child , '' said he ; '' so I told my father , just now , that I would come , and he thought me quite right .
Your sister being with you , my love , I have no scruple at all .
You would not like to leave him yourself , but you see I can be of no use .
Anne will send for me if anything is the matter . ''
Husbands and wives generally understand when opposition will be vain .
Mary knew , from Charles 's manner of speaking , that he was quite determined on going , and that it would be of no use to teaze him .
She said nothing , therefore , till he was out of the room , but as soon as there was only Anne to hear -- '' So you and I are to be left to shift by ourselves , with this poor sick child ; and not a creature coming near us all the evening !
I knew how it would be .
This is always my luck .
If there is anything disagreeable going on men are always sure to get out of it , and Charles is as bad as any of them .
Very unfeeling !
I must say it is very unfeeling of him to be running away from his poor little boy .
Talks of his being going on so well !
How does he know that he is going on well , or that there may not be a sudden change half an hour hence ?
I did not think Charles would have been so unfeeling .
So here he is to go away and enjoy himself , and because I am the poor mother , I am not to be allowed to stir ; and yet , I am sure , I am more unfit than anybody else to be about the child .
My being the mother is the very reason why my feelings should not be tried .
I am not at all equal to it .
You saw how hysterical I was yesterday . ''
`` But that was only the effect of the suddenness of your alarm -- of the shock .
You will not be hysterical again .
I dare say we shall have nothing to distress us .
I perfectly understand Mr Robinson 's directions , and have no fears ; and indeed , Mary , I can not wonder at your husband .
Nursing does not belong to a man ; it is not his province .
A sick child is always the mother 's property : her own feelings generally make it so . ''
`` I hope I am as fond of my child as any mother , but I do not know that I am of any more use in the sick-room than Charles , for I can not be always scolding and teazing the poor child when it is ill ; and you saw , this morning , that if I told him to keep quiet , he was sure to begin kicking about .
I have not nerves for the sort of thing . ''
`` But , could you be comfortable yourself , to be spending the whole evening away from the poor boy ? ''
`` Yes ; you see his papa can , and why should not I ?
Jemima is so careful ; and she could send us word every hour how he was .
I really think Charles might as well have told his father we would all come .
I am not more alarmed about little Charles now than he is .
I was dreadfully alarmed yesterday , but the case is very different to-day . ''
`` Well , if you do not think it too late to give notice for yourself , suppose you were to go , as well as your husband .
Leave little Charles to my care .
Mr and Mrs Musgrove can not think it wrong while I remain with him . ''
`` Are you serious ? ''
cried Mary , her eyes brightening .
`` Dear me !
that 's a very good thought , very good , indeed .
To be sure , I may just as well go as not , for I am of no use at home -- am I ?
and it only harasses me .
You , who have not a mother 's feelings , are a great deal the properest person .
You can make little Charles do anything ; he always minds you at a word .
It will be a great deal better than leaving him only with Jemima .
Oh !
I shall certainly go ; I am sure I ought if I can , quite as much as Charles , for they want me excessively to be acquainted with Captain Wentworth , and I know you do not mind being left alone .
An excellent thought of yours , indeed , Anne .
I will go and tell Charles , and get ready directly .
You can send for us , you know , at a moment 's notice , if anything is the matter ; but I dare say there will be nothing to alarm you .
I should not go , you may be sure , if I did not feel quite at ease about my dear child . ''
The next moment she was tapping at her husband 's dressing-room door , and as Anne followed her up stairs , she was in time for the whole conversation , which began with Mary 's saying , in a tone of great exultation -- '' I mean to go with you , Charles , for I am of no more use at home than you are .
If I were to shut myself up for ever with the child , I should not be able to persuade him to do anything he did not like .
Anne will stay ; Anne undertakes to stay at home and take care of him .
It is Anne 's own proposal , and so I shall go with you , which will be a great deal better , for I have not dined at the other house since Tuesday . ''
`` This is very kind of Anne , '' was her husband 's answer , `` and I should be very glad to have you go ; but it seems rather hard that she should be left at home by herself , to nurse our sick child . ''
Anne was now at hand to take up her own cause , and the sincerity of her manner being soon sufficient to convince him , where conviction was at least very agreeable , he had no farther scruples as to her being left to dine alone , though he still wanted her to join them in the evening , when the child might be at rest for the night , and kindly urged her to let him come and fetch her , but she was quite unpersuadable ; and this being the case , she had ere long the pleasure of seeing them set off together in high spirits .
They were gone , she hoped , to be happy , however oddly constructed such happiness might seem ; as for herself , she was left with as many sensations of comfort , as were , perhaps , ever likely to be hers .
She knew herself to be of the first utility to the child ; and what was it to her if Frederick Wentworth were only half a mile distant , making himself agreeable to others ?
She would have liked to know how he felt as to a meeting .
Perhaps indifferent , if indifference could exist under such circumstances .
He must be either indifferent or unwilling .
Had he wished ever to see her again , he need not have waited till this time ; he would have done what she could not but believe that in his place she should have done long ago , when events had been early giving him the independence which alone had been wanting .
Her brother and sister came back delighted with their new acquaintance , and their visit in general .
There had been music , singing , talking , laughing , all that was most agreeable ; charming manners in Captain Wentworth , no shyness or reserve ; they seemed all to know each other perfectly , and he was coming the very next morning to shoot with Charles .
He was to come to breakfast , but not at the Cottage , though that had been proposed at first ; but then he had been pressed to come to the Great House instead , and he seemed afraid of being in Mrs Charles Musgrove 's way , on account of the child , and therefore , somehow , they hardly knew how , it ended in Charles 's being to meet him to breakfast at his father 's .
Anne understood it .
He wished to avoid seeing her .
He had inquired after her , she found , slightly , as might suit a former slight acquaintance , seeming to acknowledge such as she had acknowledged , actuated , perhaps , by the same view of escaping introduction when they were to meet .
The morning hours of the Cottage were always later than those of the other house , and on the morrow the difference was so great that Mary and Anne were not more than beginning breakfast when Charles came in to say that they were just setting off , that he was come for his dogs , that his sisters were following with Captain Wentworth ; his sisters meaning to visit Mary and the child , and Captain Wentworth proposing also to wait on her for a few minutes if not inconvenient ; and though Charles had answered for the child 's being in no such state as could make it inconvenient , Captain Wentworth would not be satisfied without his running on to give notice .
Mary , very much gratified by this attention , was delighted to receive him , while a thousand feelings rushed on Anne , of which this was the most consoling , that it would soon be over .
And it was soon over .
In two minutes after Charles 's preparation , the others appeared ; they were in the drawing-room .
Her eye half met Captain Wentworth 's , a bow , a curtsey passed ; she heard his voice ; he talked to Mary , said all that was right , said something to the Miss Musgroves , enough to mark an easy footing ; the room seemed full , full of persons and voices , but a few minutes ended it .
Charles shewed himself at the window , all was ready , their visitor had bowed and was gone , the Miss Musgroves were gone too , suddenly resolving to walk to the end of the village with the sportsmen : the room was cleared , and Anne might finish her breakfast as she could .
`` It is over !
it is over ! ''
she repeated to herself again and again , in nervous gratitude .
`` The worst is over ! ''
Mary talked , but she could not attend .
She had seen him .
They had met .
They had been once more in the same room .
Soon , however , she began to reason with herself , and try to be feeling less .
Eight years , almost eight years had passed , since all had been given up .
How absurd to be resuming the agitation which such an interval had banished into distance and indistinctness !
What might not eight years do ?
Events of every description , changes , alienations , removals -- all , all must be comprised in it , and oblivion of the past -- how natural , how certain too !
It included nearly a third part of her own life .
Alas !
with all her reasoning , she found , that to retentive feelings eight years may be little more than nothing .
Now , how were his sentiments to be read ?
Was this like wishing to avoid her ?
And the next moment she was hating herself for the folly which asked the question .
On one other question which perhaps her utmost wisdom might not have prevented , she was soon spared all suspense ; for , after the Miss Musgroves had returned and finished their visit at the Cottage she had this spontaneous information from Mary : -- '' Captain Wentworth is not very gallant by you , Anne , though he was so attentive to me .
Henrietta asked him what he thought of you , when they went away , and he said , ` You were so altered he should not have known you again . ' ''
Mary had no feelings to make her respect her sister 's in a common way , but she was perfectly unsuspicious of being inflicting any peculiar wound .
`` Altered beyond his knowledge . ''
Anne fully submitted , in silent , deep mortification .
Doubtless it was so , and she could take no revenge , for he was not altered , or not for the worse .
She had already acknowledged it to herself , and she could not think differently , let him think of her as he would .
No : the years which had destroyed her youth and bloom had only given him a more glowing , manly , open look , in no respect lessening his personal advantages .
She had seen the same Frederick Wentworth .
`` So altered that he should not have known her again ! ''
These were words which could not but dwell with her .
Yet she soon began to rejoice that she had heard them .
They were of sobering tendency ; they allayed agitation ; they composed , and consequently must make her happier .
Frederick Wentworth had used such words , or something like them , but without an idea that they would be carried round to her .
He had thought her wretchedly altered , and in the first moment of appeal , had spoken as he felt .
He had not forgiven Anne Elliot .
She had used him ill , deserted and disappointed him ; and worse , she had shewn a feebleness of character in doing so , which his own decided , confident temper could not endure .
She had given him up to oblige others .
It had been the effect of over-persuasion .
It had been weakness and timidity .
He had been most warmly attached to her , and had never seen a woman since whom he thought her equal ; but , except from some natural sensation of curiosity , he had no desire of meeting her again .
Her power with him was gone for ever .
It was now his object to marry .
He was rich , and being turned on shore , fully intended to settle as soon as he could be properly tempted ; actually looking round , ready to fall in love with all the speed which a clear head and a quick taste could allow .
He had a heart for either of the Miss Musgroves , if they could catch it ; a heart , in short , for any pleasing young woman who came in his way , excepting Anne Elliot .
This was his only secret exception , when he said to his sister , in answer to her suppositions : -- '' Yes , here I am , Sophia , quite ready to make a foolish match .
Anybody between fifteen and thirty may have me for asking .
A little beauty , and a few smiles , and a few compliments to the navy , and I am a lost man .
Should not this be enough for a sailor , who has had no society among women to make him nice ? ''
He said it , she knew , to be contradicted .
His bright proud eye spoke the conviction that he was nice ; and Anne Elliot was not out of his thoughts , when he more seriously described the woman he should wish to meet with .
`` A strong mind , with sweetness of manner , '' made the first and the last of the description .
`` That is the woman I want , '' said he .
`` Something a little inferior I shall of course put up with , but it must not be much .
If I am a fool , I shall be a fool indeed , for I have thought on the subject more than most men . ''
Chapter 8 From this time Captain Wentworth and Anne Elliot were repeatedly in the same circle .
They were soon dining in company together at Mr Musgrove 's , for the little boy 's state could no longer supply his aunt with a pretence for absenting herself ; and this was but the beginning of other dinings and other meetings .
Whether former feelings were to be renewed must be brought to the proof ; former times must undoubtedly be brought to the recollection of each ; they could not but be reverted to ; the year of their engagement could not but be named by him , in the little narratives or descriptions which conversation called forth .
His profession qualified him , his disposition lead him , to talk ; and `` That was in the year six ; '' '' That happened before I went to sea in the year six , '' occurred in the course of the first evening they spent together : and though his voice did not falter , and though she had no reason to suppose his eye wandering towards her while he spoke , Anne felt the utter impossibility , from her knowledge of his mind , that he could be unvisited by remembrance any more than herself .
There must be the same immediate association of thought , though she was very far from conceiving it to be of equal pain .
They had no conversation together , no intercourse but what the commonest civility required .
Once so much to each other !
Now nothing !
There had been a time , when of all the large party now filling the drawing-room at Uppercross , they would have found it most difficult to cease to speak to one another .
With the exception , perhaps , of Admiral and Mrs Croft , who seemed particularly attached and happy , ( Anne could allow no other exceptions even among the married couples ) , there could have been no two hearts so open , no tastes so similar , no feelings so in unison , no countenances so beloved .
Now they were as strangers ; nay , worse than strangers , for they could never become acquainted .
It was a perpetual estrangement .
When he talked , she heard the same voice , and discerned the same mind .
There was a very general ignorance of all naval matters throughout the party ; and he was very much questioned , and especially by the two Miss Musgroves , who seemed hardly to have any eyes but for him , as to the manner of living on board , daily regulations , food , hours , & c. , and their surprise at his accounts , at learning the degree of accommodation and arrangement which was practicable , drew from him some pleasant ridicule , which reminded Anne of the early days when she too had been ignorant , and she too had been accused of supposing sailors to be living on board without anything to eat , or any cook to dress it if there were , or any servant to wait , or any knife and fork to use .
From thus listening and thinking , she was roused by a whisper of Mrs Musgrove 's who , overcome by fond regrets , could not help saying -- '' Ah !
Miss Anne , if it had pleased Heaven to spare my poor son , I dare say he would have been just such another by this time . ''
Anne suppressed a smile , and listened kindly , while Mrs Musgrove relieved her heart a little more ; and for a few minutes , therefore , could not keep pace with the conversation of the others .
When she could let her attention take its natural course again , she found the Miss Musgroves just fetching the Navy List ( their own navy list , the first that had ever been at Uppercross ) , and sitting down together to pore over it , with the professed view of finding out the ships that Captain Wentworth had commanded .
`` Your first was the Asp , I remember ; we will look for the Asp . ''
`` You will not find her there .
Quite worn out and broken up .
I was the last man who commanded her .
Hardly fit for service then .
Reported fit for home service for a year or two , and so I was sent off to the West Indies . ''
The girls looked all amazement .
`` The Admiralty , '' he continued , `` entertain themselves now and then , with sending a few hundred men to sea , in a ship not fit to be employed .
But they have a great many to provide for ; and among the thousands that may just as well go to the bottom as not , it is impossible for them to distinguish the very set who may be least missed . ''
`` Phoo !
phoo ! ''
cried the Admiral , `` what stuff these young fellows talk !
Never was a better sloop than the Asp in her day .
For an old built sloop , you would not see her equal .
Lucky fellow to get her !
He knows there must have been twenty better men than himself applying for her at the same time .
Lucky fellow to get anything so soon , with no more interest than his . ''
`` I felt my luck , Admiral , I assure you ; '' replied Captain Wentworth , seriously .
`` I was as well satisfied with my appointment as you can desire .
It was a great object with me at that time to be at sea ; a very great object , I wanted to be doing something . ''
`` To be sure you did .
What should a young fellow like you do ashore for half a year together ?
If a man had not a wife , he soon wants to be afloat again . ''
`` But , Captain Wentworth , '' cried Louisa , `` how vexed you must have been when you came to the Asp , to see what an old thing they had given you . ''
`` I knew pretty well what she was before that day ; '' said he , smiling .
`` I had no more discoveries to make than you would have as to the fashion and strength of any old pelisse , which you had seen lent about among half your acquaintance ever since you could remember , and which at last , on some very wet day , is lent to yourself .
Ah !
she was a dear old Asp to me .
She did all that I wanted .
I knew she would .
I knew that we should either go to the bottom together , or that she would be the making of me ; and I never had two days of foul weather all the time I was at sea in her ; and after taking privateers enough to be very entertaining , I had the good luck in my passage home the next autumn , to fall in with the very French frigate I wanted .
I brought her into Plymouth ; and here another instance of luck .
We had not been six hours in the Sound , when a gale came on , which lasted four days and nights , and which would have done for poor old Asp in half the time ; our touch with the Great Nation not having much improved our condition .
Four-and-twenty hours later , and I should only have been a gallant Captain Wentworth , in a small paragraph at one corner of the newspapers ; and being lost in only a sloop , nobody would have thought about me . ''
Anne 's shudderings were to herself alone ; but the Miss Musgroves could be as open as they were sincere , in their exclamations of pity and horror .
`` And so then , I suppose , '' said Mrs Musgrove , in a low voice , as if thinking aloud , `` so then he went away to the Laconia , and there he met with our poor boy .
Charles , my dear , '' ( beckoning him to her ) , '' do ask Captain Wentworth where it was he first met with your poor brother .
I always forgot . ''
`` It was at Gibraltar , mother , I know .
Dick had been left ill at Gibraltar , with a recommendation from his former captain to Captain Wentworth . ''
`` Oh !
but , Charles , tell Captain Wentworth , he need not be afraid of mentioning poor Dick before me , for it would be rather a pleasure to hear him talked of by such a good friend . ''
Charles , being somewhat more mindful of the probabilities of the case , only nodded in reply , and walked away .
The girls were now hunting for the Laconia ; and Captain Wentworth could not deny himself the pleasure of taking the precious volume into his own hands to save them the trouble , and once more read aloud the little statement of her name and rate , and present non-commissioned class , observing over it that she too had been one of the best friends man ever had .
`` Ah !
those were pleasant days when I had the Laconia !
How fast I made money in her .
A friend of mine and I had such a lovely cruise together off the Western Islands .
Poor Harville , sister !
You know how much he wanted money : worse than myself .
He had a wife .
Excellent fellow .
I shall never forget his happiness .
He felt it all , so much for her sake .
I wished for him again the next summer , when I had still the same luck in the Mediterranean . ''
`` And I am sure , Sir . ''
said Mrs Musgrove , `` it was a lucky day for us , when you were put captain into that ship .
We shall never forget what you did . ''
Her feelings made her speak low ; and Captain Wentworth , hearing only in part , and probably not having Dick Musgrove at all near his thoughts , looked rather in suspense , and as if waiting for more .
`` My brother , '' whispered one of the girls ; `` mamma is thinking of poor Richard . ''
`` Poor dear fellow ! ''
continued Mrs Musgrove ; `` he was grown so steady , and such an excellent correspondent , while he was under your care !
Ah !
it would have been a happy thing , if he had never left you .
I assure you , Captain Wentworth , we are very sorry he ever left you . ''
There was a momentary expression in Captain Wentworth 's face at this speech , a certain glance of his bright eye , and curl of his handsome mouth , which convinced Anne , that instead of sharing in Mrs Musgrove 's kind wishes , as to her son , he had probably been at some pains to get rid of him ; but it was too transient an indulgence of self-amusement to be detected by any who understood him less than herself ; in another moment he was perfectly collected and serious , and almost instantly afterwards coming up to the sofa , on which she and Mrs Musgrove were sitting , took a place by the latter , and entered into conversation with her , in a low voice , about her son , doing it with so much sympathy and natural grace , as shewed the kindest consideration for all that was real and unabsurd in the parent 's feelings .
They were actually on the same sofa , for Mrs Musgrove had most readily made room for him ; they were divided only by Mrs Musgrove .
It was no insignificant barrier , indeed .
Mrs Musgrove was of a comfortable , substantial size , infinitely more fitted by nature to express good cheer and good humour , than tenderness and sentiment ; and while the agitations of Anne 's slender form , and pensive face , may be considered as very completely screened , Captain Wentworth should be allowed some credit for the self-command with which he attended to her large fat sighings over the destiny of a son , whom alive nobody had cared for .
Personal size and mental sorrow have certainly no necessary proportions .
A large bulky figure has as good a right to be in deep affliction , as the most graceful set of limbs in the world .
But , fair or not fair , there are unbecoming conjunctions , which reason will patronize in vain -- which taste can not tolerate -- which ridicule will seize .
The Admiral , after taking two or three refreshing turns about the room with his hands behind him , being called to order by his wife , now came up to Captain Wentworth , and without any observation of what he might be interrupting , thinking only of his own thoughts , began with -- '' If you had been a week later at Lisbon , last spring , Frederick , you would have been asked to give a passage to Lady Mary Grierson and her daughters . ''
`` Should I ?
I am glad I was not a week later then . ''
The Admiral abused him for his want of gallantry .
He defended himself ; though professing that he would never willingly admit any ladies on board a ship of his , excepting for a ball , or a visit , which a few hours might comprehend .
`` But , if I know myself , '' said he , `` this is from no want of gallantry towards them .
It is rather from feeling how impossible it is , with all one 's efforts , and all one 's sacrifices , to make the accommodations on board such as women ought to have .
There can be no want of gallantry , Admiral , in rating the claims of women to every personal comfort high , and this is what I do .
I hate to hear of women on board , or to see them on board ; and no ship under my command shall ever convey a family of ladies anywhere , if I can help it . ''
This brought his sister upon him .
`` Oh !
Frederick !
But I can not believe it of you .
-- All idle refinement !
-- Women may be as comfortable on board , as in the best house in England .
I believe I have lived as much on board as most women , and I know nothing superior to the accommodations of a man-of-war .
I declare I have not a comfort or an indulgence about me , even at Kellynch Hall , '' ( with a kind bow to Anne ) , `` beyond what I always had in most of the ships I have lived in ; and they have been five altogether . ''
`` Nothing to the purpose , '' replied her brother .
`` You were living with your husband , and were the only woman on board . ''
`` But you , yourself , brought Mrs Harville , her sister , her cousin , and three children , round from Portsmouth to Plymouth .
Where was this superfine , extraordinary sort of gallantry of yours then ? ''
`` All merged in my friendship , Sophia .
I would assist any brother officer 's wife that I could , and I would bring anything of Harville 's from the world 's end , if he wanted it .
But do not imagine that I did not feel it an evil in itself . ''
`` Depend upon it , they were all perfectly comfortable . ''
`` I might not like them the better for that perhaps .
Such a number of women and children have no right to be comfortable on board . ''
`` My dear Frederick , you are talking quite idly .
Pray , what would become of us poor sailors ' wives , who often want to be conveyed to one port or another , after our husbands , if everybody had your feelings ? ''
`` My feelings , you see , did not prevent my taking Mrs Harville and all her family to Plymouth . ''
`` But I hate to hear you talking so like a fine gentleman , and as if women were all fine ladies , instead of rational creatures .
We none of us expect to be in smooth water all our days . ''
`` Ah !
my dear , '' said the Admiral , `` when he had got a wife , he will sing a different tune .
When he is married , if we have the good luck to live to another war , we shall see him do as you and I , and a great many others , have done .
We shall have him very thankful to anybody that will bring him his wife . ''
`` Ay , that we shall . ''
`` Now I have done , '' cried Captain Wentworth .
`` When once married people begin to attack me with , -- ` Oh !
you will think very differently , when you are married . '
I can only say , ` No , I shall not ; ' and then they say again , ` Yes , you will , ' and there is an end of it . ''
He got up and moved away .
`` What a great traveller you must have been , ma'am ! ''
said Mrs Musgrove to Mrs Croft .
`` Pretty well , ma'am in the fifteen years of my marriage ; though many women have done more .
I have crossed the Atlantic four times , and have been once to the East Indies , and back again , and only once ; besides being in different places about home : Cork , and Lisbon , and Gibraltar .
But I never went beyond the Streights , and never was in the West Indies .
We do not call Bermuda or Bahama , you know , the West Indies . ''
Mrs Musgrove had not a word to say in dissent ; she could not accuse herself of having ever called them anything in the whole course of her life .
`` And I do assure you , ma'am , '' pursued Mrs Croft , `` that nothing can exceed the accommodations of a man-of-war ; I speak , you know , of the higher rates .
When you come to a frigate , of course , you are more confined ; though any reasonable woman may be perfectly happy in one of them ; and I can safely say , that the happiest part of my life has been spent on board a ship .
While we were together , you know , there was nothing to be feared .
Thank God !
I have always been blessed with excellent health , and no climate disagrees with me .
A little disordered always the first twenty-four hours of going to sea , but never knew what sickness was afterwards .
The only time I ever really suffered in body or mind , the only time that I ever fancied myself unwell , or had any ideas of danger , was the winter that I passed by myself at Deal , when the Admiral ( Captain Croft then ) was in the North Seas .
I lived in perpetual fright at that time , and had all manner of imaginary complaints from not knowing what to do with myself , or when I should hear from him next ; but as long as we could be together , nothing ever ailed me , and I never met with the smallest inconvenience . ''
`` Aye , to be sure .
Yes , indeed , oh yes !
I am quite of your opinion , Mrs Croft , '' was Mrs Musgrove 's hearty answer .
`` There is nothing so bad as a separation .
I am quite of your opinion .
I know what it is , for Mr Musgrove always attends the assizes , and I am so glad when they are over , and he is safe back again . ''
The evening ended with dancing .
On its being proposed , Anne offered her services , as usual ; and though her eyes would sometimes fill with tears as she sat at the instrument , she was extremely glad to be employed , and desired nothing in return but to be unobserved .
It was a merry , joyous party , and no one seemed in higher spirits than Captain Wentworth .
She felt that he had every thing to elevate him which general attention and deference , and especially the attention of all the young women , could do .
The Miss Hayters , the females of the family of cousins already mentioned , were apparently admitted to the honour of being in love with him ; and as for Henrietta and Louisa , they both seemed so entirely occupied by him , that nothing but the continued appearance of the most perfect good-will between themselves could have made it credible that they were not decided rivals .
If he were a little spoilt by such universal , such eager admiration , who could wonder ?
These were some of the thoughts which occupied Anne , while her fingers were mechanically at work , proceeding for half an hour together , equally without error , and without consciousness .
Once she felt that he was looking at herself , observing her altered features , perhaps , trying to trace in them the ruins of the face which had once charmed him ; and once she knew that he must have spoken of her ; she was hardly aware of it , till she heard the answer ; but then she was sure of his having asked his partner whether Miss Elliot never danced ?
The answer was , `` Oh , no ; never ; she has quite given up dancing .
She had rather play .
She is never tired of playing . ''
Once , too , he spoke to her .
She had left the instrument on the dancing being over , and he had sat down to try to make out an air which he wished to give the Miss Musgroves an idea of .
Unintentionally she returned to that part of the room ; he saw her , and , instantly rising , said , with studied politeness -- '' I beg your pardon , madam , this is your seat ; '' and though she immediately drew back with a decided negative , he was not to be induced to sit down again .
Anne did not wish for more of such looks and speeches .
His cold politeness , his ceremonious grace , were worse than anything .
Chapter 9 Captain Wentworth was come to Kellynch as to a home , to stay as long as he liked , being as thoroughly the object of the Admiral 's fraternal kindness as of his wife 's .
He had intended , on first arriving , to proceed very soon into Shropshire , and visit the brother settled in that country , but the attractions of Uppercross induced him to put this off .
There was so much of friendliness , and of flattery , and of everything most bewitching in his reception there ; the old were so hospitable , the young so agreeable , that he could not but resolve to remain where he was , and take all the charms and perfections of Edward 's wife upon credit a little longer .
It was soon Uppercross with him almost every day .
The Musgroves could hardly be more ready to invite than he to come , particularly in the morning , when he had no companion at home , for the Admiral and Mrs Croft were generally out of doors together , interesting themselves in their new possessions , their grass , and their sheep , and dawdling about in a way not endurable to a third person , or driving out in a gig , lately added to their establishment .
Hitherto there had been but one opinion of Captain Wentworth among the Musgroves and their dependencies .
It was unvarying , warm admiration everywhere ; but this intimate footing was not more than established , when a certain Charles Hayter returned among them , to be a good deal disturbed by it , and to think Captain Wentworth very much in the way .
Charles Hayter was the eldest of all the cousins , and a very amiable , pleasing young man , between whom and Henrietta there had been a considerable appearance of attachment previous to Captain Wentworth's introduction .
He was in orders ; and having a curacy in the neighbourhood , where residence was not required , lived at his father 's house , only two miles from Uppercross .
A short absence from home had left his fair one unguarded by his attentions at this critical period , and when he came back he had the pain of finding very altered manners , and of seeing Captain Wentworth .
Mrs Musgrove and Mrs Hayter were sisters .
They had each had money , but their marriages had made a material difference in their degree of consequence .
Mr Hayter had some property of his own , but it was insignificant compared with Mr Musgrove 's ; and while the Musgroves were in the first class of society in the country , the young Hayters would , from their parents ' inferior , retired , and unpolished way of living , and their own defective education , have been hardly in any class at all , but for their connexion with Uppercross , this eldest son of course excepted , who had chosen to be a scholar and a gentleman , and who was very superior in cultivation and manners to all the rest .
The two families had always been on excellent terms , there being no pride on one side , and no envy on the other , and only such a consciousness of superiority in the Miss Musgroves , as made them pleased to improve their cousins .
Charles 's attentions to Henrietta had been observed by her father and mother without any disapprobation .
`` It would not be a great match for her ; but if Henrietta liked him , '' -- and Henrietta did seem to like him .
Henrietta fully thought so herself , before Captain Wentworth came ; but from that time Cousin Charles had been very much forgotten .
Which of the two sisters was preferred by Captain Wentworth was as yet quite doubtful , as far as Anne 's observation reached .
Henrietta was perhaps the prettiest , Louisa had the higher spirits ; and she knew not now , whether the more gentle or the more lively character were most likely to attract him .
Mr and Mrs Musgrove , either from seeing little , or from an entire confidence in the discretion of both their daughters , and of all the young men who came near them , seemed to leave everything to take its chance .
There was not the smallest appearance of solicitude or remark about them in the Mansion-house ; but it was different at the Cottage : the young couple there were more disposed to speculate and wonder ; and Captain Wentworth had not been above four or five times in the Miss Musgroves ' company , and Charles Hayter had but just reappeared , when Anne had to listen to the opinions of her brother and sister , as to which was the one liked best .
Charles gave it for Louisa , Mary for Henrietta , but quite agreeing that to have him marry either could be extremely delightful .
Charles `` had never seen a pleasanter man in his life ; and from what he had once heard Captain Wentworth himself say , was very sure that he had not made less than twenty thousand pounds by the war .
Here was a fortune at once ; besides which , there would be the chance of what might be done in any future war ; and he was sure Captain Wentworth was as likely a man to distinguish himself as any officer in the navy .
Oh !
it would be a capital match for either of his sisters . ''
`` Upon my word it would , '' replied Mary .
`` Dear me !
If he should rise to any very great honours !
If he should ever be made a baronet !
` Lady Wentworth ' sounds very well .
That would be a noble thing , indeed , for Henrietta !
She would take place of me then , and Henrietta would not dislike that .
Sir Frederick and Lady Wentworth !
It would be but a new creation , however , and I never think much of your new creations . ''
It suited Mary best to think Henrietta the one preferred on the very account of Charles Hayter , whose pretensions she wished to see put an end to .
She looked down very decidedly upon the Hayters , and thought it would be quite a misfortune to have the existing connection between the families renewed -- very sad for herself and her children .
`` You know , '' said she , `` I can not think him at all a fit match for Henrietta ; and considering the alliances which the Musgroves have made , she has no right to throw herself away .
I do not think any young woman has a right to make a choice that may be disagreeable and inconvenient to the principal part of her family , and be giving bad connections to those who have not been used to them .
And , pray , who is Charles Hayter ?
Nothing but a country curate .
A most improper match for Miss Musgrove of Uppercross . ''
Her husband , however , would not agree with her here ; for besides having a regard for his cousin , Charles Hayter was an eldest son , and he saw things as an eldest son himself .
`` Now you are taking nonsense , Mary , '' was therefore his answer .
`` It would not be a great match for Henrietta , but Charles has a very fair chance , through the Spicers , of getting something from the Bishop in the course of a year or two ; and you will please to remember , that he is the eldest son ; whenever my uncle dies , he steps into very pretty property .
The estate at Winthrop is not less than two hundred and fifty acres , besides the farm near Taunton , which is some of the best land in the country .
I grant you , that any of them but Charles would be a very shocking match for Henrietta , and indeed it could not be ; he is the only one that could be possible ; but he is a very good-natured , good sort of a fellow ; and whenever Winthrop comes into his hands , he will make a different sort of place of it , and live in a very different sort of way ; and with that property , he will never be a contemptible man -- good , freehold property .
No , no ; Henrietta might do worse than marry Charles Hayter ; and if she has him , and Louisa can get Captain Wentworth , I shall be very well satisfied . ''
`` Charles may say what he pleases , '' cried Mary to Anne , as soon as he was out of the room , `` but it would be shocking to have Henrietta marry Charles Hayter ; a very bad thing for her , and still worse for me ; and therefore it is very much to be wished that Captain Wentworth may soon put him quite out of her head , and I have very little doubt that he has .
She took hardly any notice of Charles Hayter yesterday .
I wish you had been there to see her behaviour .
And as to Captain Wentworth 's liking Louisa as well as Henrietta , it is nonsense to say so ; for he certainly does like Henrietta a great deal the best .
But Charles is so positive !
I wish you had been with us yesterday , for then you might have decided between us ; and I am sure you would have thought as I did , unless you had been determined to give it against me . ''
A dinner at Mr Musgrove 's had been the occasion when all these things should have been seen by Anne ; but she had staid at home , under the mixed plea of a headache of her own , and some return of indisposition in little Charles .
She had thought only of avoiding Captain Wentworth ; but an escape from being appealed to as umpire was now added to the advantages of a quiet evening .
As to Captain Wentworth 's views , she deemed it of more consequence that he should know his own mind early enough not to be endangering the happiness of either sister , or impeaching his own honour , than that he should prefer Henrietta to Louisa , or Louisa to Henrietta .
Either of them would , in all probability , make him an affectionate , good-humoured wife .
With regard to Charles Hayter , she had delicacy which must be pained by any lightness of conduct in a well-meaning young woman , and a heart to sympathize in any of the sufferings it occasioned ; but if Henrietta found herself mistaken in the nature of her feelings , the alternation could not be understood too soon .
Charles Hayter had met with much to disquiet and mortify him in his cousin 's behaviour .
She had too old a regard for him to be so wholly estranged as might in two meetings extinguish every past hope , and leave him nothing to do but to keep away from Uppercross : but there was such a change as became very alarming , when such a man as Captain Wentworth was to be regarded as the probable cause .
He had been absent only two Sundays , and when they parted , had left her interested , even to the height of his wishes , in his prospect of soon quitting his present curacy , and obtaining that of Uppercross instead .
It had then seemed the object nearest her heart , that Dr Shirley , the rector , who for more than forty years had been zealously discharging all the duties of his office , but was now growing too infirm for many of them , should be quite fixed on engaging a curate ; should make his curacy quite as good as he could afford , and should give Charles Hayter the promise of it .
The advantage of his having to come only to Uppercross , instead of going six miles another way ; of his having , in every respect , a better curacy ; of his belonging to their dear Dr Shirley , and of dear , good Dr Shirley's being relieved from the duty which he could no longer get through without most injurious fatigue , had been a great deal , even to Louisa , but had been almost everything to Henrietta .
When he came back , alas !
the zeal of the business was gone by .
Louisa could not listen at all to his account of a conversation which he had just held with Dr Shirley : she was at a window , looking out for Captain Wentworth ; and even Henrietta had at best only a divided attention to give , and seemed to have forgotten all the former doubt and solicitude of the negotiation .
`` Well , I am very glad indeed : but I always thought you would have it ; I always thought you sure .
It did not appear to me that -- in short , you know , Dr Shirley must have a curate , and you had secured his promise .
Is he coming , Louisa ? ''
One morning , very soon after the dinner at the Musgroves , at which Anne had not been present , Captain Wentworth walked into the drawing-room at the Cottage , where were only herself and the little invalid Charles , who was lying on the sofa .
The surprise of finding himself almost alone with Anne Elliot , deprived his manners of their usual composure : he started , and could only say , `` I thought the Miss Musgroves had been here : Mrs Musgrove told me I should find them here , '' before he walked to the window to recollect himself , and feel how he ought to behave .
`` They are up stairs with my sister : they will be down in a few moments , I dare say , '' had been Anne 's reply , in all the confusion that was natural ; and if the child had not called her to come and do something for him , she would have been out of the room the next moment , and released Captain Wentworth as well as herself .
He continued at the window ; and after calmly and politely saying , '' I hope the little boy is better , '' was silent .
She was obliged to kneel down by the sofa , and remain there to satisfy her patient ; and thus they continued a few minutes , when , to her very great satisfaction , she heard some other person crossing the little vestibule .
She hoped , on turning her head , to see the master of the house ; but it proved to be one much less calculated for making matters easy -- Charles Hayter , probably not at all better pleased by the sight of Captain Wentworth than Captain Wentworth had been by the sight of Anne .
She only attempted to say , `` How do you do ?
Will you not sit down ?
The others will be here presently . ''
Captain Wentworth , however , came from his window , apparently not ill-disposed for conversation ; but Charles Hayter soon put an end to his attempts by seating himself near the table , and taking up the newspaper ; and Captain Wentworth returned to his window .
Another minute brought another addition .
The younger boy , a remarkable stout , forward child , of two years old , having got the door opened for him by some one without , made his determined appearance among them , and went straight to the sofa to see what was going on , and put in his claim to anything good that might be giving away .
There being nothing to eat , he could only have some play ; and as his aunt would not let him tease his sick brother , he began to fasten himself upon her , as she knelt , in such a way that , busy as she was about Charles , she could not shake him off .
She spoke to him , ordered , entreated , and insisted in vain .
Once she did contrive to push him away , but the boy had the greater pleasure in getting upon her back again directly .
`` Walter , '' said she , `` get down this moment .
You are extremely troublesome .
I am very angry with you . ''
`` Walter , '' cried Charles Hayter , `` why do you not do as you are bid ?
Do not you hear your aunt speak ?
Come to me , Walter , come to cousin Charles . ''
But not a bit did Walter stir .
In another moment , however , she found herself in the state of being released from him ; some one was taking him from her , though he had bent down her head so much , that his little sturdy hands were unfastened from around her neck , and he was resolutely borne away , before she knew that Captain Wentworth had done it .
Her sensations on the discovery made her perfectly speechless .
She could not even thank him .
She could only hang over little Charles , with most disordered feelings .
His kindness in stepping forward to her relief , the manner , the silence in which it had passed , the little particulars of the circumstance , with the conviction soon forced on her by the noise he was studiously making with the child , that he meant to avoid hearing her thanks , and rather sought to testify that her conversation was the last of his wants , produced such a confusion of varying , but very painful agitation , as she could not recover from , till enabled by the entrance of Mary and the Miss Musgroves to make over her little patient to their cares , and leave the room .
She could not stay .
It might have been an opportunity of watching the loves and jealousies of the four -- they were now altogether ; but she could stay for none of it .
It was evident that Charles Hayter was not well inclined towards Captain Wentworth .
She had a strong impression of his having said , in a vext tone of voice , after Captain Wentworth 's interference , '' You ought to have minded me , Walter ; I told you not to teaze your aunt ; '' and could comprehend his regretting that Captain Wentworth should do what he ought to have done himself .
But neither Charles Hayter 's feelings , nor anybody 's feelings , could interest her , till she had a little better arranged her own .
She was ashamed of herself , quite ashamed of being so nervous , so overcome by such a trifle ; but so it was , and it required a long application of solitude and reflection to recover her .
Chapter 10 Other opportunities of making her observations could not fail to occur .
Anne had soon been in company with all the four together often enough to have an opinion , though too wise to acknowledge as much at home , where she knew it would have satisfied neither husband nor wife ; for while she considered Louisa to be rather the favourite , she could not but think , as far as she might dare to judge from memory and experience , that Captain Wentworth was not in love with either .
They were more in love with him ; yet there it was not love .
It was a little fever of admiration ; but it might , probably must , end in love with some .
Charles Hayter seemed aware of being slighted , and yet Henrietta had sometimes the air of being divided between them .
Anne longed for the power of representing to them all what they were about , and of pointing out some of the evils they were exposing themselves to .
She did not attribute guile to any .
It was the highest satisfaction to her to believe Captain Wentworth not in the least aware of the pain he was occasioning .
There was no triumph , no pitiful triumph in his manner .
He had , probably , never heard , and never thought of any claims of Charles Hayter .
He was only wrong in accepting the attentions ( for accepting must be the word ) of two young women at once .
After a short struggle , however , Charles Hayter seemed to quit the field .
Three days had passed without his coming once to Uppercross ; a most decided change .
He had even refused one regular invitation to dinner ; and having been found on the occasion by Mr Musgrove with some large books before him , Mr and Mrs Musgrove were sure all could not be right , and talked , with grave faces , of his studying himself to death .
It was Mary 's hope and belief that he had received a positive dismissal from Henrietta , and her husband lived under the constant dependence of seeing him to-morrow .
Anne could only feel that Charles Hayter was wise .
One morning , about this time Charles Musgrove and Captain Wentworth being gone a-shooting together , as the sisters in the Cottage were sitting quietly at work , they were visited at the window by the sisters from the Mansion-house .
It was a very fine November day , and the Miss Musgroves came through the little grounds , and stopped for no other purpose than to say , that they were going to take a long walk , and therefore concluded Mary could not like to go with them ; and when Mary immediately replied , with some jealousy at not being supposed a good walker , `` Oh , yes , I should like to join you very much , I am very fond of a long walk ; '' Anne felt persuaded , by the looks of the two girls , that it was precisely what they did not wish , and admired again the sort of necessity which the family habits seemed to produce , of everything being to be communicated , and everything being to be done together , however undesired and inconvenient .
She tried to dissuade Mary from going , but in vain ; and that being the case , thought it best to accept the Miss Musgroves ' much more cordial invitation to herself to go likewise , as she might be useful in turning back with her sister , and lessening the interference in any plan of their own .
`` I can not imagine why they should suppose I should not like a long walk , '' said Mary , as she went up stairs .
`` Everybody is always supposing that I am not a good walker ; and yet they would not have been pleased , if we had refused to join them .
When people come in this manner on purpose to ask us , how can one say no ? ''
Just as they were setting off , the gentlemen returned .
They had taken out a young dog , who had spoilt their sport , and sent them back early .
Their time and strength , and spirits , were , therefore , exactly ready for this walk , and they entered into it with pleasure .
Could Anne have foreseen such a junction , she would have staid at home ; but , from some feelings of interest and curiosity , she fancied now that it was too late to retract , and the whole six set forward together in the direction chosen by the Miss Musgroves , who evidently considered the walk as under their guidance .
Anne 's object was , not to be in the way of anybody ; and where the narrow paths across the fields made many separations necessary , to keep with her brother and sister .
Her pleasure in the walk must arise from the exercise and the day , from the view of the last smiles of the year upon the tawny leaves , and withered hedges , and from repeating to herself some few of the thousand poetical descriptions extant of autumn , that season of peculiar and inexhaustible influence on the mind of taste and tenderness , that season which had drawn from every poet , worthy of being read , some attempt at description , or some lines of feeling .
She occupied her mind as much as possible in such like musings and quotations ; but it was not possible , that when within reach of Captain Wentworth 's conversation with either of the Miss Musgroves , she should not try to hear it ; yet she caught little very remarkable .
It was mere lively chat , such as any young persons , on an intimate footing , might fall into .
He was more engaged with Louisa than with Henrietta .
Louisa certainly put more forward for his notice than her sister .
This distinction appeared to increase , and there was one speech of Louisa 's which struck her .
After one of the many praises of the day , which were continually bursting forth , Captain Wentworth added : -- '' What glorious weather for the Admiral and my sister !
They meant to take a long drive this morning ; perhaps we may hail them from some of these hills .
They talked of coming into this side of the country .
I wonder whereabouts they will upset to-day .
Oh !
it does happen very often , I assure you ; but my sister makes nothing of it ; she would as lieve be tossed out as not . ''
`` Ah !
You make the most of it , I know , '' cried Louisa , `` but if it were really so , I should do just the same in her place .
If I loved a man , as she loves the Admiral , I would always be with him , nothing should ever separate us , and I would rather be overturned by him , than driven safely by anybody else . ''
It was spoken with enthusiasm .
`` Had you ? ''
cried he , catching the same tone ; `` I honour you ! ''
And there was silence between them for a little while .
Anne could not immediately fall into a quotation again .
The sweet scenes of autumn were for a while put by , unless some tender sonnet , fraught with the apt analogy of the declining year , with declining happiness , and the images of youth and hope , and spring , all gone together , blessed her memory .
She roused herself to say , as they struck by order into another path , `` Is not this one of the ways to Winthrop ? ''
But nobody heard , or , at least , nobody answered her .
Winthrop , however , or its environs -- for young men are , sometimes to be met with , strolling about near home -- was their destination ; and after another half mile of gradual ascent through large enclosures , where the ploughs at work , and the fresh made path spoke the farmer counteracting the sweets of poetical despondence , and meaning to have spring again , they gained the summit of the most considerable hill , which parted Uppercross and Winthrop , and soon commanded a full view of the latter , at the foot of the hill on the other side .
Winthrop , without beauty and without dignity , was stretched before them an indifferent house , standing low , and hemmed in by the barns and buildings of a farm-yard .
Mary exclaimed , `` Bless me !
here is Winthrop .
I declare I had no idea !
Well now , I think we had better turn back ; I am excessively tired . ''
Henrietta , conscious and ashamed , and seeing no cousin Charles walking along any path , or leaning against any gate , was ready to do as Mary wished ; but `` No ! ''
said Charles Musgrove , and `` No , no ! ''
cried Louisa more eagerly , and taking her sister aside , seemed to be arguing the matter warmly .
Charles , in the meanwhile , was very decidedly declaring his resolution of calling on his aunt , now that he was so near ; and very evidently , though more fearfully , trying to induce his wife to go too .
But this was one of the points on which the lady shewed her strength ; and when he recommended the advantage of resting herself a quarter of an hour at Winthrop , as she felt so tired , she resolutely answered , '' Oh !
no , indeed !
walking up that hill again would do her more harm than any sitting down could do her good ; '' and , in short , her look and manner declared , that go she would not .
After a little succession of these sort of debates and consultations , it was settled between Charles and his two sisters , that he and Henrietta should just run down for a few minutes , to see their aunt and cousins , while the rest of the party waited for them at the top of the hill .
Louisa seemed the principal arranger of the plan ; and , as she went a little way with them , down the hill , still talking to Henrietta , Mary took the opportunity of looking scornfully around her , and saying to Captain Wentworth -- '' It is very unpleasant , having such connexions !
But , I assure you , I have never been in the house above twice in my life . ''
She received no other answer , than an artificial , assenting smile , followed by a contemptuous glance , as he turned away , which Anne perfectly knew the meaning of .
The brow of the hill , where they remained , was a cheerful spot : Louisa returned ; and Mary , finding a comfortable seat for herself on the step of a stile , was very well satisfied so long as the others all stood about her ; but when Louisa drew Captain Wentworth away , to try for a gleaning of nuts in an adjoining hedge-row , and they were gone by degrees quite out of sight and sound , Mary was happy no longer ; she quarrelled with her own seat , was sure Louisa had got a much better somewhere , and nothing could prevent her from going to look for a better also .
She turned through the same gate , but could not see them .
Anne found a nice seat for her , on a dry sunny bank , under the hedge-row , in which she had no doubt of their still being , in some spot or other .
Mary sat down for a moment , but it would not do ; she was sure Louisa had found a better seat somewhere else , and she would go on till she overtook her .
Anne , really tired herself , was glad to sit down ; and she very soon heard Captain Wentworth and Louisa in the hedge-row , behind her , as if making their way back along the rough , wild sort of channel , down the centre .
They were speaking as they drew near .
Louisa 's voice was the first distinguished .
She seemed to be in the middle of some eager speech .
What Anne first heard was -- '' And so , I made her go .
I could not bear that she should be frightened from the visit by such nonsense .
What !
would I be turned back from doing a thing that I had determined to do , and that I knew to be right , by the airs and interference of such a person , or of any person I may say ?
No , I have no idea of being so easily persuaded .
When I have made up my mind , I have made it ; and Henrietta seemed entirely to have made up hers to call at Winthrop to-day ; and yet , she was as near giving it up , out of nonsensical complaisance ! ''
`` She would have turned back then , but for you ? ''
`` She would indeed .
I am almost ashamed to say it . ''
`` Happy for her , to have such a mind as yours at hand !
After the hints you gave just now , which did but confirm my own observations , the last time I was in company with him , I need not affect to have no comprehension of what is going on .
I see that more than a mere dutiful morning visit to your aunt was in question ; and woe betide him , and her too , when it comes to things of consequence , when they are placed in circumstances requiring fortitude and strength of mind , if she have not resolution enough to resist idle interference in such a trifle as this .
Your sister is an amiable creature ; but yours is the character of decision and firmness , I see .
If you value her conduct or happiness , infuse as much of your own spirit into her as you can .
But this , no doubt , you have been always doing .
It is the worst evil of too yielding and indecisive a character , that no influence over it can be depended on .
You are never sure of a good impression being durable ; everybody may sway it .
Let those who would be happy be firm .
Here is a nut , '' said he , catching one down from an upper bough .
`` to exemplify : a beautiful glossy nut , which , blessed with original strength , has outlived all the storms of autumn .
Not a puncture , not a weak spot anywhere .
This nut , '' he continued , with playful solemnity , '' while so many of his brethren have fallen and been trodden under foot , is still in possession of all the happiness that a hazel nut can be supposed capable of . ''
Then returning to his former earnest tone -- '' My first wish for all whom I am interested in , is that they should be firm .
If Louisa Musgrove would be beautiful and happy in her November of life , she will cherish all her present powers of mind . ''
He had done , and was unanswered .
It would have surprised Anne if Louisa could have readily answered such a speech : words of such interest , spoken with such serious warmth !
She could imagine what Louisa was feeling .
For herself , she feared to move , lest she should be seen .
While she remained , a bush of low rambling holly protected her , and they were moving on .
Before they were beyond her hearing , however , Louisa spoke again .
`` Mary is good-natured enough in many respects , '' said she ; '' but she does sometimes provoke me excessively , by her nonsense and pride -- the Elliot pride .
She has a great deal too much of the Elliot pride .
We do so wish that Charles had married Anne instead .
I suppose you know he wanted to marry Anne ? ''
After a moment 's pause , Captain Wentworth said -- '' Do you mean that she refused him ? ''
`` Oh !
yes ; certainly . ''
`` When did that happen ? ''
`` I do not exactly know , for Henrietta and I were at school at the time ; but I believe about a year before he married Mary .
I wish she had accepted him .
We should all have liked her a great deal better ; and papa and mamma always think it was her great friend Lady Russell 's doing , that she did not .
They think Charles might not be learned and bookish enough to please Lady Russell , and that therefore , she persuaded Anne to refuse him . ''
The sounds were retreating , and Anne distinguished no more .
Her own emotions still kept her fixed .
She had much to recover from , before she could move .
The listener 's proverbial fate was not absolutely hers ; she had heard no evil of herself , but she had heard a great deal of very painful import .
She saw how her own character was considered by Captain Wentworth , and there had been just that degree of feeling and curiosity about her in his manner which must give her extreme agitation .
As soon as she could , she went after Mary , and having found , and walked back with her to their former station , by the stile , felt some comfort in their whole party being immediately afterwards collected , and once more in motion together .
Her spirits wanted the solitude and silence which only numbers could give .
Charles and Henrietta returned , bringing , as may be conjectured , Charles Hayter with them .
The minutiae of the business Anne could not attempt to understand ; even Captain Wentworth did not seem admitted to perfect confidence here ; but that there had been a withdrawing on the gentleman 's side , and a relenting on the lady 's , and that they were now very glad to be together again , did not admit a doubt .
Henrietta looked a little ashamed , but very well pleased ; -- Charles Hayter exceedingly happy : and they were devoted to each other almost from the first instant of their all setting forward for Uppercross .
Everything now marked out Louisa for Captain Wentworth ; nothing could be plainer ; and where many divisions were necessary , or even where they were not , they walked side by side nearly as much as the other two .
In a long strip of meadow land , where there was ample space for all , they were thus divided , forming three distinct parties ; and to that party of the three which boasted least animation , and least complaisance , Anne necessarily belonged .
She joined Charles and Mary , and was tired enough to be very glad of Charles 's other arm ; but Charles , though in very good humour with her , was out of temper with his wife .
Mary had shewn herself disobliging to him , and was now to reap the consequence , which consequence was his dropping her arm almost every moment to cut off the heads of some nettles in the hedge with his switch ; and when Mary began to complain of it , and lament her being ill-used , according to custom , in being on the hedge side , while Anne was never incommoded on the other , he dropped the arms of both to hunt after a weasel which he had a momentary glance of , and they could hardly get him along at all .
This long meadow bordered a lane , which their footpath , at the end of it was to cross , and when the party had all reached the gate of exit , the carriage advancing in the same direction , which had been some time heard , was just coming up , and proved to be Admiral Croft 's gig .
He and his wife had taken their intended drive , and were returning home .
Upon hearing how long a walk the young people had engaged in , they kindly offered a seat to any lady who might be particularly tired ; it would save her a full mile , and they were going through Uppercross .
The invitation was general , and generally declined .
The Miss Musgroves were not at all tired , and Mary was either offended , by not being asked before any of the others , or what Louisa called the Elliot pride could not endure to make a third in a one horse chaise .
The walking party had crossed the lane , and were surmounting an opposite stile , and the Admiral was putting his horse in motion again , when Captain Wentworth cleared the hedge in a moment to say something to his sister .
The something might be guessed by its effects .
`` Miss Elliot , I am sure you are tired , '' cried Mrs Croft .
`` Do let us have the pleasure of taking you home .
Here is excellent room for three , I assure you .
If we were all like you , I believe we might sit four .
You must , indeed , you must . ''
Anne was still in the lane ; and though instinctively beginning to decline , she was not allowed to proceed .
The Admiral 's kind urgency came in support of his wife 's ; they would not be refused ; they compressed themselves into the smallest possible space to leave her a corner , and Captain Wentworth , without saying a word , turned to her , and quietly obliged her to be assisted into the carriage .
Yes ; he had done it .
She was in the carriage , and felt that he had placed her there , that his will and his hands had done it , that she owed it to his perception of her fatigue , and his resolution to give her rest .
She was very much affected by the view of his disposition towards her , which all these things made apparent .
This little circumstance seemed the completion of all that had gone before .
She understood him .
He could not forgive her , but he could not be unfeeling .
Though condemning her for the past , and considering it with high and unjust resentment , though perfectly careless of her , and though becoming attached to another , still he could not see her suffer , without the desire of giving her relief .
It was a remainder of former sentiment ; it was an impulse of pure , though unacknowledged friendship ; it was a proof of his own warm and amiable heart , which she could not contemplate without emotions so compounded of pleasure and pain , that she knew not which prevailed .
Her answers to the kindness and the remarks of her companions were at first unconsciously given .
They had travelled half their way along the rough lane , before she was quite awake to what they said .
She then found them talking of `` Frederick . ''
`` He certainly means to have one or other of those two girls , Sophy , '' said the Admiral ; `` but there is no saying which .
He has been running after them , too , long enough , one would think , to make up his mind .
Ay , this comes of the peace .
If it were war now , he would have settled it long ago .
We sailors , Miss Elliot , can not afford to make long courtships in time of war .
How many days was it , my dear , between the first time of my seeing you and our sitting down together in our lodgings at North Yarmouth ? ''
`` We had better not talk about it , my dear , '' replied Mrs Croft , pleasantly ; '' for if Miss Elliot were to hear how soon we came to an understanding , she would never be persuaded that we could be happy together .
I had known you by character , however , long before . ''
`` Well , and I had heard of you as a very pretty girl , and what were we to wait for besides ?
I do not like having such things so long in hand .
I wish Frederick would spread a little more canvass , and bring us home one of these young ladies to Kellynch .
Then there would always be company for them .
And very nice young ladies they both are ; I hardly know one from the other . ''
`` Very good humoured , unaffected girls , indeed , '' said Mrs Croft , in a tone of calmer praise , such as made Anne suspect that her keener powers might not consider either of them as quite worthy of her brother ; `` and a very respectable family .
One could not be connected with better people .
My dear Admiral , that post !
we shall certainly take that post . ''
But by coolly giving the reins a better direction herself they happily passed the danger ; and by once afterwards judiciously putting out her hand they neither fell into a rut , nor ran foul of a dung-cart ; and Anne , with some amusement at their style of driving , which she imagined no bad representation of the general guidance of their affairs , found herself safely deposited by them at the Cottage .
Chapter 11 The time now approached for Lady Russell 's return : the day was even fixed ; and Anne , being engaged to join her as soon as she was resettled , was looking forward to an early removal to Kellynch , and beginning to think how her own comfort was likely to be affected by it .
It would place her in the same village with Captain Wentworth , within half a mile of him ; they would have to frequent the same church , and there must be intercourse between the two families .
This was against her ; but on the other hand , he spent so much of his time at Uppercross , that in removing thence she might be considered rather as leaving him behind , than as going towards him ; and , upon the whole , she believed she must , on this interesting question , be the gainer , almost as certainly as in her change of domestic society , in leaving poor Mary for Lady Russell .
She wished it might be possible for her to avoid ever seeing Captain Wentworth at the Hall : those rooms had witnessed former meetings which would be brought too painfully before her ; but she was yet more anxious for the possibility of Lady Russell and Captain Wentworth never meeting anywhere .
They did not like each other , and no renewal of acquaintance now could do any good ; and were Lady Russell to see them together , she might think that he had too much self-possession , and she too little .
These points formed her chief solicitude in anticipating her removal from Uppercross , where she felt she had been stationed quite long enough .
Her usefulness to little Charles would always give some sweetness to the memory of her two months ' visit there , but he was gaining strength apace , and she had nothing else to stay for .
The conclusion of her visit , however , was diversified in a way which she had not at all imagined .
Captain Wentworth , after being unseen and unheard of at Uppercross for two whole days , appeared again among them to justify himself by a relation of what had kept him away .
A letter from his friend , Captain Harville , having found him out at last , had brought intelligence of Captain Harville 's being settled with his family at Lyme for the winter ; of their being therefore , quite unknowingly , within twenty miles of each other .
Captain Harville had never been in good health since a severe wound which he received two years before , and Captain Wentworth 's anxiety to see him had determined him to go immediately to Lyme .
He had been there for four-and-twenty hours .
His acquittal was complete , his friendship warmly honoured , a lively interest excited for his friend , and his description of the fine country about Lyme so feelingly attended to by the party , that an earnest desire to see Lyme themselves , and a project for going thither was the consequence .
The young people were all wild to see Lyme .
Captain Wentworth talked of going there again himself , it was only seventeen miles from Uppercross ; though November , the weather was by no means bad ; and , in short , Louisa , who was the most eager of the eager , having formed the resolution to go , and besides the pleasure of doing as she liked , being now armed with the idea of merit in maintaining her own way , bore down all the wishes of her father and mother for putting it off till summer ; and to Lyme they were to go -- Charles , Mary , Anne , Henrietta , Louisa , and Captain Wentworth .
The first heedless scheme had been to go in the morning and return at night ; but to this Mr Musgrove , for the sake of his horses , would not consent ; and when it came to be rationally considered , a day in the middle of November would not leave much time for seeing a new place , after deducting seven hours , as the nature of the country required , for going and returning .
They were , consequently , to stay the night there , and not to be expected back till the next day 's dinner .
This was felt to be a considerable amendment ; and though they all met at the Great House at rather an early breakfast hour , and set off very punctually , it was so much past noon before the two carriages , Mr Musgrove 's coach containing the four ladies , and Charles 's curricle , in which he drove Captain Wentworth , were descending the long hill into Lyme , and entering upon the still steeper street of the town itself , that it was very evident they would not have more than time for looking about them , before the light and warmth of the day were gone .
After securing accommodations , and ordering a dinner at one of the inns , the next thing to be done was unquestionably to walk directly down to the sea .
They were come too late in the year for any amusement or variety which Lyme , as a public place , might offer .
The rooms were shut up , the lodgers almost all gone , scarcely any family but of the residents left ; and , as there is nothing to admire in the buildings themselves , the remarkable situation of the town , the principal street almost hurrying into the water , the walk to the Cobb , skirting round the pleasant little bay , which , in the season , is animated with bathing machines and company ; the Cobb itself , its old wonders and new improvements , with the very beautiful line of cliffs stretching out to the east of the town , are what the stranger 's eye will seek ; and a very strange stranger it must be , who does not see charms in the immediate environs of Lyme , to make him wish to know it better .
The scenes in its neighbourhood , Charmouth , with its high grounds and extensive sweeps of country , and still more , its sweet , retired bay , backed by dark cliffs , where fragments of low rock among the sands , make it the happiest spot for watching the flow of the tide , for sitting in unwearied contemplation ; the woody varieties of the cheerful village of Up Lyme ; and , above all , Pinny , with its green chasms between romantic rocks , where the scattered forest trees and orchards of luxuriant growth , declare that many a generation must have passed away since the first partial falling of the cliff prepared the ground for such a state , where a scene so wonderful and so lovely is exhibited , as may more than equal any of the resembling scenes of the far-famed Isle of Wight : these places must be visited , and visited again , to make the worth of Lyme understood .
The party from Uppercross passing down by the now deserted and melancholy looking rooms , and still descending , soon found themselves on the sea-shore ; and lingering only , as all must linger and gaze on a first return to the sea , who ever deserved to look on it at all , proceeded towards the Cobb , equally their object in itself and on Captain Wentworth 's account : for in a small house , near the foot of an old pier of unknown date , were the Harvilles settled .
Captain Wentworth turned in to call on his friend ; the others walked on , and he was to join them on the Cobb .
They were by no means tired of wondering and admiring ; and not even Louisa seemed to feel that they had parted with Captain Wentworth long , when they saw him coming after them , with three companions , all well known already , by description , to be Captain and Mrs Harville , and a Captain Benwick , who was staying with them .
Captain Benwick had some time ago been first lieutenant of the Laconia ; and the account which Captain Wentworth had given of him , on his return from Lyme before , his warm praise of him as an excellent young man and an officer , whom he had always valued highly , which must have stamped him well in the esteem of every listener , had been followed by a little history of his private life , which rendered him perfectly interesting in the eyes of all the ladies .
He had been engaged to Captain Harville 's sister , and was now mourning her loss .
They had been a year or two waiting for fortune and promotion .
Fortune came , his prize-money as lieutenant being great ; promotion , too , came at last ; but Fanny Harville did not live to know it .
She had died the preceding summer while he was at sea .
Captain Wentworth believed it impossible for man to be more attached to woman than poor Benwick had been to Fanny Harville , or to be more deeply afflicted under the dreadful change .
He considered his disposition as of the sort which must suffer heavily , uniting very strong feelings with quiet , serious , and retiring manners , and a decided taste for reading , and sedentary pursuits .
To finish the interest of the story , the friendship between him and the Harvilles seemed , if possible , augmented by the event which closed all their views of alliance , and Captain Benwick was now living with them entirely .
Captain Harville had taken his present house for half a year ; his taste , and his health , and his fortune , all directing him to a residence inexpensive , and by the sea ; and the grandeur of the country , and the retirement of Lyme in the winter , appeared exactly adapted to Captain Benwick's state of mind .
The sympathy and good-will excited towards Captain Benwick was very great .
`` And yet , '' said Anne to herself , as they now moved forward to meet the party , `` he has not , perhaps , a more sorrowing heart than I have .
I can not believe his prospects so blighted for ever .
He is younger than I am ; younger in feeling , if not in fact ; younger as a man .
He will rally again , and be happy with another . ''
They all met , and were introduced .
Captain Harville was a tall , dark man , with a sensible , benevolent countenance ; a little lame ; and from strong features and want of health , looking much older than Captain Wentworth .
Captain Benwick looked , and was , the youngest of the three , and , compared with either of them , a little man .
He had a pleasing face and a melancholy air , just as he ought to have , and drew back from conversation .
Captain Harville , though not equalling Captain Wentworth in manners , was a perfect gentleman , unaffected , warm , and obliging .
Mrs Harville , a degree less polished than her husband , seemed , however , to have the same good feelings ; and nothing could be more pleasant than their desire of considering the whole party as friends of their own , because the friends of Captain Wentworth , or more kindly hospitable than their entreaties for their all promising to dine with them .
The dinner , already ordered at the inn , was at last , though unwillingly , accepted as a excuse ; but they seemed almost hurt that Captain Wentworth should have brought any such party to Lyme , without considering it as a thing of course that they should dine with them .
There was so much attachment to Captain Wentworth in all this , and such a bewitching charm in a degree of hospitality so uncommon , so unlike the usual style of give-and-take invitations , and dinners of formality and display , that Anne felt her spirits not likely to be benefited by an increasing acquaintance among his brother-officers .
`` These would have been all my friends , '' was her thought ; and she had to struggle against a great tendency to lowness .
On quitting the Cobb , they all went in-doors with their new friends , and found rooms so small as none but those who invite from the heart could think capable of accommodating so many .
Anne had a moment 's astonishment on the subject herself ; but it was soon lost in the pleasanter feelings which sprang from the sight of all the ingenious contrivances and nice arrangements of Captain Harville , to turn the actual space to the best account , to supply the deficiencies of lodging-house furniture , and defend the windows and doors against the winter storms to be expected .
The varieties in the fitting-up of the rooms , where the common necessaries provided by the owner , in the common indifferent plight , were contrasted with some few articles of a rare species of wood , excellently worked up , and with something curious and valuable from all the distant countries Captain Harville had visited , were more than amusing to Anne ; connected as it all was with his profession , the fruit of its labours , the effect of its influence on his habits , the picture of repose and domestic happiness it presented , made it to her a something more , or less , than gratification .
Captain Harville was no reader ; but he had contrived excellent accommodations , and fashioned very pretty shelves , for a tolerable collection of well-bound volumes , the property of Captain Benwick .
His lameness prevented him from taking much exercise ; but a mind of usefulness and ingenuity seemed to furnish him with constant employment within .
He drew , he varnished , he carpentered , he glued ; he made toys for the children ; he fashioned new netting-needles and pins with improvements ; and if everything else was done , sat down to his large fishing-net at one corner of the room .
Anne thought she left great happiness behind her when they quitted the house ; and Louisa , by whom she found herself walking , burst forth into raptures of admiration and delight on the character of the navy ; their friendliness , their brotherliness , their openness , their uprightness ; protesting that she was convinced of sailors having more worth and warmth than any other set of men in England ; that they only knew how to live , and they only deserved to be respected and loved .
They went back to dress and dine ; and so well had the scheme answered already , that nothing was found amiss ; though its being '' so entirely out of season , '' and the `` no thoroughfare of Lyme , '' and the `` no expectation of company , '' had brought many apologies from the heads of the inn .
Anne found herself by this time growing so much more hardened to being in Captain Wentworth 's company than she had at first imagined could ever be , that the sitting down to the same table with him now , and the interchange of the common civilities attending on it ( they never got beyond ) , was become a mere nothing .
The nights were too dark for the ladies to meet again till the morrow , but Captain Harville had promised them a visit in the evening ; and he came , bringing his friend also , which was more than had been expected , it having been agreed that Captain Benwick had all the appearance of being oppressed by the presence of so many strangers .
He ventured among them again , however , though his spirits certainly did not seem fit for the mirth of the party in general .
While Captains Wentworth and Harville led the talk on one side of the room , and by recurring to former days , supplied anecdotes in abundance to occupy and entertain the others , it fell to Anne 's lot to be placed rather apart with Captain Benwick ; and a very good impulse of her nature obliged her to begin an acquaintance with him .
He was shy , and disposed to abstraction ; but the engaging mildness of her countenance , and gentleness of her manners , soon had their effect ; and Anne was well repaid the first trouble of exertion .
He was evidently a young man of considerable taste in reading , though principally in poetry ; and besides the persuasion of having given him at least an evening 's indulgence in the discussion of subjects , which his usual companions had probably no concern in , she had the hope of being of real use to him in some suggestions as to the duty and benefit of struggling against affliction , which had naturally grown out of their conversation .
For , though shy , he did not seem reserved ; it had rather the appearance of feelings glad to burst their usual restraints ; and having talked of poetry , the richness of the present age , and gone through a brief comparison of opinion as to the first-rate poets , trying to ascertain whether Marmion or The Lady of the Lake were to be preferred , and how ranked the Giaour and The Bride of Abydos ; and moreover , how the Giaour was to be pronounced , he showed himself so intimately acquainted with all the tenderest songs of the one poet , and all the impassioned descriptions of hopeless agony of the other ; he repeated , with such tremulous feeling , the various lines which imaged a broken heart , or a mind destroyed by wretchedness , and looked so entirely as if he meant to be understood , that she ventured to hope he did not always read only poetry , and to say , that she thought it was the misfortune of poetry to be seldom safely enjoyed by those who enjoyed it completely ; and that the strong feelings which alone could estimate it truly were the very feelings which ought to taste it but sparingly .
His looks shewing him not pained , but pleased with this allusion to his situation , she was emboldened to go on ; and feeling in herself the right of seniority of mind , she ventured to recommend a larger allowance of prose in his daily study ; and on being requested to particularize , mentioned such works of our best moralists , such collections of the finest letters , such memoirs of characters of worth and suffering , as occurred to her at the moment as calculated to rouse and fortify the mind by the highest precepts , and the strongest examples of moral and religious endurances .
Captain Benwick listened attentively , and seemed grateful for the interest implied ; and though with a shake of the head , and sighs which declared his little faith in the efficacy of any books on grief like his , noted down the names of those she recommended , and promised to procure and read them .
When the evening was over , Anne could not but be amused at the idea of her coming to Lyme to preach patience and resignation to a young man whom she had never seen before ; nor could she help fearing , on more serious reflection , that , like many other great moralists and preachers , she had been eloquent on a point in which her own conduct would ill bear examination .
Chapter 12 Anne and Henrietta , finding themselves the earliest of the party the next morning , agreed to stroll down to the sea before breakfast .
They went to the sands , to watch the flowing of the tide , which a fine south-easterly breeze was bringing in with all the grandeur which so flat a shore admitted .
They praised the morning ; gloried in the sea ; sympathized in the delight of the fresh-feeling breeze -- and were silent ; till Henrietta suddenly began again with -- '' Oh !
yes , -- I am quite convinced that , with very few exceptions , the sea-air always does good .
There can be no doubt of its having been of the greatest service to Dr Shirley , after his illness , last spring twelve-month .
He declares himself , that coming to Lyme for a month , did him more good than all the medicine he took ; and , that being by the sea , always makes him feel young again .
Now , I can not help thinking it a pity that he does not live entirely by the sea .
I do think he had better leave Uppercross entirely , and fix at Lyme .
Do not you , Anne ?
Do not you agree with me , that it is the best thing he could do , both for himself and Mrs Shirley ?
She has cousins here , you know , and many acquaintance , which would make it cheerful for her , and I am sure she would be glad to get to a place where she could have medical attendance at hand , in case of his having another seizure .
Indeed I think it quite melancholy to have such excellent people as Dr and Mrs Shirley , who have been doing good all their lives , wearing out their last days in a place like Uppercross , where , excepting our family , they seem shut out from all the world .
I wish his friends would propose it to him .
I really think they ought .
And , as to procuring a dispensation , there could be no difficulty at his time of life , and with his character .
My only doubt is , whether anything could persuade him to leave his parish .
He is so very strict and scrupulous in his notions ; over-scrupulous I must say .
Do not you think , Anne , it is being over-scrupulous ?
Do not you think it is quite a mistaken point of conscience , when a clergyman sacrifices his health for the sake of duties , which may be just as well performed by another person ?
And at Lyme too , only seventeen miles off , he would be near enough to hear , if people thought there was anything to complain of . ''
Anne smiled more than once to herself during this speech , and entered into the subject , as ready to do good by entering into the feelings of a young lady as of a young man , though here it was good of a lower standard , for what could be offered but general acquiescence ?
She said all that was reasonable and proper on the business ; felt the claims of Dr Shirley to repose as she ought ; saw how very desirable it was that he should have some active , respectable young man , as a resident curate , and was even courteous enough to hint at the advantage of such resident curate 's being married .
`` I wish , '' said Henrietta , very well pleased with her companion , '' I wish Lady Russell lived at Uppercross , and were intimate with Dr Shirley .
I have always heard of Lady Russell as a woman of the greatest influence with everybody !
I always look upon her as able to persuade a person to anything !
I am afraid of her , as I have told you before , quite afraid of her , because she is so very clever ; but I respect her amazingly , and wish we had such a neighbour at Uppercross . ''
Anne was amused by Henrietta 's manner of being grateful , and amused also that the course of events and the new interests of Henrietta 's views should have placed her friend at all in favour with any of the Musgrove family ; she had only time , however , for a general answer , and a wish that such another woman were at Uppercross , before all subjects suddenly ceased , on seeing Louisa and Captain Wentworth coming towards them .
They came also for a stroll till breakfast was likely to be ready ; but Louisa recollecting , immediately afterwards that she had something to procure at a shop , invited them all to go back with her into the town .
They were all at her disposal .
When they came to the steps , leading upwards from the beach , a gentleman , at the same moment preparing to come down , politely drew back , and stopped to give them way .
They ascended and passed him ; and as they passed , Anne 's face caught his eye , and he looked at her with a degree of earnest admiration , which she could not be insensible of .
She was looking remarkably well ; her very regular , very pretty features , having the bloom and freshness of youth restored by the fine wind which had been blowing on her complexion , and by the animation of eye which it had also produced .
It was evident that the gentleman , ( completely a gentleman in manner ) admired her exceedingly .
Captain Wentworth looked round at her instantly in a way which shewed his noticing of it .
He gave her a momentary glance , a glance of brightness , which seemed to say , `` That man is struck with you , and even I , at this moment , see something like Anne Elliot again . ''
After attending Louisa through her business , and loitering about a little longer , they returned to the inn ; and Anne , in passing afterwards quickly from her own chamber to their dining-room , had nearly run against the very same gentleman , as he came out of an adjoining apartment .
She had before conjectured him to be a stranger like themselves , and determined that a well-looking groom , who was strolling about near the two inns as they came back , should be his servant .
Both master and man being in mourning assisted the idea .
It was now proved that he belonged to the same inn as themselves ; and this second meeting , short as it was , also proved again by the gentleman 's looks , that he thought hers very lovely , and by the readiness and propriety of his apologies , that he was a man of exceedingly good manners .
He seemed about thirty , and though not handsome , had an agreeable person .
Anne felt that she should like to know who he was .
They had nearly done breakfast , when the sound of a carriage , ( almost the first they had heard since entering Lyme ) drew half the party to the window .
It was a gentleman 's carriage , a curricle , but only coming round from the stable-yard to the front door ; somebody must be going away .
It was driven by a servant in mourning .
The word curricle made Charles Musgrove jump up that he might compare it with his own ; the servant in mourning roused Anne 's curiosity , and the whole six were collected to look , by the time the owner of the curricle was to be seen issuing from the door amidst the bows and civilities of the household , and taking his seat , to drive off .
`` Ah ! ''
cried Captain Wentworth , instantly , and with half a glance at Anne , '' it is the very man we passed . ''
The Miss Musgroves agreed to it ; and having all kindly watched him as far up the hill as they could , they returned to the breakfast table .
The waiter came into the room soon afterwards .
`` Pray , '' said Captain Wentworth , immediately , `` can you tell us the name of the gentleman who is just gone away ? ''
`` Yes , Sir , a Mr Elliot , a gentleman of large fortune , came in last night from Sidmouth .
Dare say you heard the carriage , sir , while you were at dinner ; and going on now for Crewkherne , in his way to Bath and London . ''
`` Elliot ! ''
Many had looked on each other , and many had repeated the name , before all this had been got through , even by the smart rapidity of a waiter .
`` Bless me ! ''
cried Mary ; `` it must be our cousin ; it must be our Mr Elliot , it must , indeed !
Charles , Anne , must not it ?
In mourning , you see , just as our Mr Elliot must be .
How very extraordinary !
In the very same inn with us !
Anne , must not it be our Mr Elliot ?
my father 's next heir ?
Pray sir , '' turning to the waiter , '' did not you hear , did not his servant say whether he belonged to the Kellynch family ? ''
`` No , ma'am , he did not mention no particular family ; but he said his master was a very rich gentleman , and would be a baronight some day . ''
`` There !
you see ! ''
cried Mary in an ecstasy , `` just as I said !
Heir to Sir Walter Elliot !
I was sure that would come out , if it was so .
Depend upon it , that is a circumstance which his servants take care to publish , wherever he goes .
But , Anne , only conceive how extraordinary !
I wish I had looked at him more .
I wish we had been aware in time , who it was , that he might have been introduced to us .
What a pity that we should not have been introduced to each other !
Do you think he had the Elliot countenance ?
I hardly looked at him , I was looking at the horses ; but I think he had something of the Elliot countenance , I wonder the arms did not strike me !
Oh !
the great-coat was hanging over the panel , and hid the arms , so it did ; otherwise , I am sure , I should have observed them , and the livery too ; if the servant had not been in mourning , one should have known him by the livery . ''
`` Putting all these very extraordinary circumstances together , '' said Captain Wentworth , `` we must consider it to be the arrangement of Providence , that you should not be introduced to your cousin . ''
When she could command Mary 's attention , Anne quietly tried to convince her that their father and Mr Elliot had not , for many years , been on such terms as to make the power of attempting an introduction at all desirable .
At the same time , however , it was a secret gratification to herself to have seen her cousin , and to know that the future owner of Kellynch was undoubtedly a gentleman , and had an air of good sense .
She would not , upon any account , mention her having met with him the second time ; luckily Mary did not much attend to their having passed close by him in their earlier walk , but she would have felt quite ill-used by Anne 's having actually run against him in the passage , and received his very polite excuses , while she had never been near him at all ; no , that cousinly little interview must remain a perfect secret .
`` Of course , '' said Mary , `` you will mention our seeing Mr Elliot , the next time you write to Bath .
I think my father certainly ought to hear of it ; do mention all about him . ''
Anne avoided a direct reply , but it was just the circumstance which she considered as not merely unnecessary to be communicated , but as what ought to be suppressed .
The offence which had been given her father , many years back , she knew ; Elizabeth 's particular share in it she suspected ; and that Mr Elliot 's idea always produced irritation in both was beyond a doubt .
Mary never wrote to Bath herself ; all the toil of keeping up a slow and unsatisfactory correspondence with Elizabeth fell on Anne .
Breakfast had not been long over , when they were joined by Captain and Mrs Harville and Captain Benwick ; with whom they had appointed to take their last walk about Lyme .
They ought to be setting off for Uppercross by one , and in the mean while were to be all together , and out of doors as long as they could .
Anne found Captain Benwick getting near her , as soon as they were all fairly in the street .
Their conversation the preceding evening did not disincline him to seek her again ; and they walked together some time , talking as before of Mr Scott and Lord Byron , and still as unable as before , and as unable as any other two readers , to think exactly alike of the merits of either , till something occasioned an almost general change amongst their party , and instead of Captain Benwick , she had Captain Harville by her side .
`` Miss Elliot , '' said he , speaking rather low , `` you have done a good deed in making that poor fellow talk so much .
I wish he could have such company oftener .
It is bad for him , I know , to be shut up as he is ; but what can we do ?
We can not part . ''
`` No , '' said Anne , `` that I can easily believe to be impossible ; but in time , perhaps -- we know what time does in every case of affliction , and you must remember , Captain Harville , that your friend may yet be called a young mourner -- only last summer , I understand . ''
`` Ay , true enough , '' ( with a deep sigh ) `` only June . ''
`` And not known to him , perhaps , so soon . ''
`` Not till the first week of August , when he came home from the Cape , just made into the Grappler .
I was at Plymouth dreading to hear of him ; he sent in letters , but the Grappler was under orders for Portsmouth .
There the news must follow him , but who was to tell it ?
not I. I would as soon have been run up to the yard-arm .
Nobody could do it , but that good fellow '' ( pointing to Captain Wentworth . )
`` The Laconia had come into Plymouth the week before ; no danger of her being sent to sea again .
He stood his chance for the rest ; wrote up for leave of absence , but without waiting the return , travelled night and day till he got to Portsmouth , rowed off to the Grappler that instant , and never left the poor fellow for a week .
That 's what he did , and nobody else could have saved poor James .
You may think , Miss Elliot , whether he is dear to us ! ''
Anne did think on the question with perfect decision , and said as much in reply as her own feeling could accomplish , or as his seemed able to bear , for he was too much affected to renew the subject , and when he spoke again , it was of something totally different .
Mrs Harville 's giving it as her opinion that her husband would have quite walking enough by the time he reached home , determined the direction of all the party in what was to be their last walk ; they would accompany them to their door , and then return and set off themselves .
By all their calculations there was just time for this ; but as they drew near the Cobb , there was such a general wish to walk along it once more , all were so inclined , and Louisa soon grew so determined , that the difference of a quarter of an hour , it was found , would be no difference at all ; so with all the kind leave-taking , and all the kind interchange of invitations and promises which may be imagined , they parted from Captain and Mrs Harville at their own door , and still accompanied by Captain Benwick , who seemed to cling to them to the last , proceeded to make the proper adieus to the Cobb .
Anne found Captain Benwick again drawing near her .
Lord Byron's '' dark blue seas '' could not fail of being brought forward by their present view , and she gladly gave him all her attention as long as attention was possible .
It was soon drawn , perforce another way .
There was too much wind to make the high part of the new Cobb pleasant for the ladies , and they agreed to get down the steps to the lower , and all were contented to pass quietly and carefully down the steep flight , excepting Louisa ; she must be jumped down them by Captain Wentworth .
In all their walks , he had had to jump her from the stiles ; the sensation was delightful to her .
The hardness of the pavement for her feet , made him less willing upon the present occasion ; he did it , however .
She was safely down , and instantly , to show her enjoyment , ran up the steps to be jumped down again .
He advised her against it , thought the jar too great ; but no , he reasoned and talked in vain , she smiled and said , `` I am determined I will : '' he put out his hands ; she was too precipitate by half a second , she fell on the pavement on the Lower Cobb , and was taken up lifeless !
There was no wound , no blood , no visible bruise ; but her eyes were closed , she breathed not , her face was like death .
The horror of the moment to all who stood around !
Captain Wentworth , who had caught her up , knelt with her in his arms , looking on her with a face as pallid as her own , in an agony of silence .
`` She is dead !
she is dead ! ''
screamed Mary , catching hold of her husband , and contributing with his own horror to make him immoveable ; and in another moment , Henrietta , sinking under the conviction , lost her senses too , and would have fallen on the steps , but for Captain Benwick and Anne , who caught and supported her between them .
`` Is there no one to help me ? ''
were the first words which burst from Captain Wentworth , in a tone of despair , and as if all his own strength were gone .
`` Go to him , go to him , '' cried Anne , `` for heaven 's sake go to him .
I can support her myself .
Leave me , and go to him .
Rub her hands , rub her temples ; here are salts ; take them , take them . ''
Captain Benwick obeyed , and Charles at the same moment , disengaging himself from his wife , they were both with him ; and Louisa was raised up and supported more firmly between them , and everything was done that Anne had prompted , but in vain ; while Captain Wentworth , staggering against the wall for his support , exclaimed in the bitterest agony -- '' Oh God !
her father and mother ! ''
`` A surgeon ! ''
said Anne .
He caught the word ; it seemed to rouse him at once , and saying only -- '' True , true , a surgeon this instant , '' was darting away , when Anne eagerly suggested -- '' Captain Benwick , would not it be better for Captain Benwick ?
He knows where a surgeon is to be found . ''
Every one capable of thinking felt the advantage of the idea , and in a moment ( it was all done in rapid moments ) Captain Benwick had resigned the poor corpse-like figure entirely to the brother 's care , and was off for the town with the utmost rapidity .
As to the wretched party left behind , it could scarcely be said which of the three , who were completely rational , was suffering most : Captain Wentworth , Anne , or Charles , who , really a very affectionate brother , hung over Louisa with sobs of grief , and could only turn his eyes from one sister , to see the other in a state as insensible , or to witness the hysterical agitations of his wife , calling on him for help which he could not give .
Anne , attending with all the strength and zeal , and thought , which instinct supplied , to Henrietta , still tried , at intervals , to suggest comfort to the others , tried to quiet Mary , to animate Charles , to assuage the feelings of Captain Wentworth .
Both seemed to look to her for directions .
`` Anne , Anne , '' cried Charles , `` What is to be done next ?
What , in heaven 's name , is to be done next ? ''
Captain Wentworth 's eyes were also turned towards her .
`` Had not she better be carried to the inn ?
Yes , I am sure : carry her gently to the inn . ''
`` Yes , yes , to the inn , '' repeated Captain Wentworth , comparatively collected , and eager to be doing something .
`` I will carry her myself .
Musgrove , take care of the others . ''
By this time the report of the accident had spread among the workmen and boatmen about the Cobb , and many were collected near them , to be useful if wanted , at any rate , to enjoy the sight of a dead young lady , nay , two dead young ladies , for it proved twice as fine as the first report .
To some of the best-looking of these good people Henrietta was consigned , for , though partially revived , she was quite helpless ; and in this manner , Anne walking by her side , and Charles attending to his wife , they set forward , treading back with feelings unutterable , the ground , which so lately , so very lately , and so light of heart , they had passed along .
They were not off the Cobb , before the Harvilles met them .
Captain Benwick had been seen flying by their house , with a countenance which showed something to be wrong ; and they had set off immediately , informed and directed as they passed , towards the spot .
Shocked as Captain Harville was , he brought senses and nerves that could be instantly useful ; and a look between him and his wife decided what was to be done .
She must be taken to their house ; all must go to their house ; and await the surgeon 's arrival there .
They would not listen to scruples : he was obeyed ; they were all beneath his roof ; and while Louisa , under Mrs Harville 's direction , was conveyed up stairs , and given possession of her own bed , assistance , cordials , restoratives were supplied by her husband to all who needed them .
Louisa had once opened her eyes , but soon closed them again , without apparent consciousness .
This had been a proof of life , however , of service to her sister ; and Henrietta , though perfectly incapable of being in the same room with Louisa , was kept , by the agitation of hope and fear , from a return of her own insensibility .
Mary , too , was growing calmer .
The surgeon was with them almost before it had seemed possible .
They were sick with horror , while he examined ; but he was not hopeless .
The head had received a severe contusion , but he had seen greater injuries recovered from : he was by no means hopeless ; he spoke cheerfully .
That he did not regard it as a desperate case , that he did not say a few hours must end it , was at first felt , beyond the hope of most ; and the ecstasy of such a reprieve , the rejoicing , deep and silent , after a few fervent ejaculations of gratitude to Heaven had been offered , may be conceived .
The tone , the look , with which `` Thank God ! ''
was uttered by Captain Wentworth , Anne was sure could never be forgotten by her ; nor the sight of him afterwards , as he sat near a table , leaning over it with folded arms and face concealed , as if overpowered by the various feelings of his soul , and trying by prayer and reflection to calm them .
Louisa 's limbs had escaped .
There was no injury but to the head .
It now became necessary for the party to consider what was best to be done , as to their general situation .
They were now able to speak to each other and consult .
That Louisa must remain where she was , however distressing to her friends to be involving the Harvilles in such trouble , did not admit a doubt .
Her removal was impossible .
The Harvilles silenced all scruples ; and , as much as they could , all gratitude .
They had looked forward and arranged everything before the others began to reflect .
Captain Benwick must give up his room to them , and get another bed elsewhere ; and the whole was settled .
They were only concerned that the house could accommodate no more ; and yet perhaps , by `` putting the children away in the maid 's room , or swinging a cot somewhere , '' they could hardly bear to think of not finding room for two or three besides , supposing they might wish to stay ; though , with regard to any attendance on Miss Musgrove , there need not be the least uneasiness in leaving her to Mrs Harville 's care entirely .
Mrs Harville was a very experienced nurse , and her nursery-maid , who had lived with her long , and gone about with her everywhere , was just such another .
Between these two , she could want no possible attendance by day or night .
And all this was said with a truth and sincerity of feeling irresistible .
Charles , Henrietta , and Captain Wentworth were the three in consultation , and for a little while it was only an interchange of perplexity and terror .
`` Uppercross , the necessity of some one 's going to Uppercross ; the news to be conveyed ; how it could be broken to Mr and Mrs Musgrove ; the lateness of the morning ; an hour already gone since they ought to have been off ; the impossibility of being in tolerable time . ''
At first , they were capable of nothing more to the purpose than such exclamations ; but , after a while , Captain Wentworth , exerting himself , said -- '' We must be decided , and without the loss of another minute .
Every minute is valuable .
Some one must resolve on being off for Uppercross instantly .
Musgrove , either you or I must go . ''
Charles agreed , but declared his resolution of not going away .
He would be as little incumbrance as possible to Captain and Mrs Harville ; but as to leaving his sister in such a state , he neither ought , nor would .
So far it was decided ; and Henrietta at first declared the same .
She , however , was soon persuaded to think differently .
The usefulness of her staying !
She who had not been able to remain in Louisa 's room , or to look at her , without sufferings which made her worse than helpless !
She was forced to acknowledge that she could do no good , yet was still unwilling to be away , till , touched by the thought of her father and mother , she gave it up ; she consented , she was anxious to be at home .
The plan had reached this point , when Anne , coming quietly down from Louisa 's room , could not but hear what followed , for the parlour door was open .
`` Then it is settled , Musgrove , '' cried Captain Wentworth , '' that you stay , and that I take care of your sister home .
But as to the rest , as to the others , if one stays to assist Mrs Harville , I think it need be only one .
Mrs Charles Musgrove will , of course , wish to get back to her children ; but if Anne will stay , no one so proper , so capable as Anne . ''
She paused a moment to recover from the emotion of hearing herself so spoken of .
The other two warmly agreed with what he said , and she then appeared .
`` You will stay , I am sure ; you will stay and nurse her ; '' cried he , turning to her and speaking with a glow , and yet a gentleness , which seemed almost restoring the past .
She coloured deeply , and he recollected himself and moved away .
She expressed herself most willing , ready , happy to remain .
`` It was what she had been thinking of , and wishing to be allowed to do .
A bed on the floor in Louisa 's room would be sufficient for her , if Mrs Harville would but think so . ''
One thing more , and all seemed arranged .
Though it was rather desirable that Mr and Mrs Musgrove should be previously alarmed by some share of delay ; yet the time required by the Uppercross horses to take them back , would be a dreadful extension of suspense ; and Captain Wentworth proposed , and Charles Musgrove agreed , that it would be much better for him to take a chaise from the inn , and leave Mr Musgrove 's carriage and horses to be sent home the next morning early , when there would be the farther advantage of sending an account of Louisa 's night .
Captain Wentworth now hurried off to get everything ready on his part , and to be soon followed by the two ladies .
When the plan was made known to Mary , however , there was an end of all peace in it .
She was so wretched and so vehement , complained so much of injustice in being expected to go away instead of Anne ; Anne , who was nothing to Louisa , while she was her sister , and had the best right to stay in Henrietta 's stead !
Why was not she to be as useful as Anne ?
And to go home without Charles , too , without her husband !
No , it was too unkind .
And in short , she said more than her husband could long withstand , and as none of the others could oppose when he gave way , there was no help for it ; the change of Mary for Anne was inevitable .
Anne had never submitted more reluctantly to the jealous and ill-judging claims of Mary ; but so it must be , and they set off for the town , Charles taking care of his sister , and Captain Benwick attending to her .
She gave a moment 's recollection , as they hurried along , to the little circumstances which the same spots had witnessed earlier in the morning .
There she had listened to Henrietta 's schemes for Dr Shirley 's leaving Uppercross ; farther on , she had first seen Mr Elliot ; a moment seemed all that could now be given to any one but Louisa , or those who were wrapt up in her welfare .
Captain Benwick was most considerately attentive to her ; and , united as they all seemed by the distress of the day , she felt an increasing degree of good-will towards him , and a pleasure even in thinking that it might , perhaps , be the occasion of continuing their acquaintance .
Captain Wentworth was on the watch for them , and a chaise and four in waiting , stationed for their convenience in the lowest part of the street ; but his evident surprise and vexation at the substitution of one sister for the other , the change in his countenance , the astonishment , the expressions begun and suppressed , with which Charles was listened to , made but a mortifying reception of Anne ; or must at least convince her that she was valued only as she could be useful to Louisa .
She endeavoured to be composed , and to be just .
Without emulating the feelings of an Emma towards her Henry , she would have attended on Louisa with a zeal above the common claims of regard , for his sake ; and she hoped he would not long be so unjust as to suppose she would shrink unnecessarily from the office of a friend .
In the mean while she was in the carriage .
He had handed them both in , and placed himself between them ; and in this manner , under these circumstances , full of astonishment and emotion to Anne , she quitted Lyme .
How the long stage would pass ; how it was to affect their manners ; what was to be their sort of intercourse , she could not foresee .
It was all quite natural , however .
He was devoted to Henrietta ; always turning towards her ; and when he spoke at all , always with the view of supporting her hopes and raising her spirits .
In general , his voice and manner were studiously calm .
To spare Henrietta from agitation seemed the governing principle .
Once only , when she had been grieving over the last ill-judged , ill-fated walk to the Cobb , bitterly lamenting that it ever had been thought of , he burst forth , as if wholly overcome -- '' Do n't talk of it , do n't talk of it , '' he cried .
`` Oh God !
that I had not given way to her at the fatal moment !
Had I done as I ought !
But so eager and so resolute !
Dear , sweet Louisa ! ''
Anne wondered whether it ever occurred to him now , to question the justness of his own previous opinion as to the universal felicity and advantage of firmness of character ; and whether it might not strike him that , like all other qualities of the mind , it should have its proportions and limits .
She thought it could scarcely escape him to feel that a persuadable temper might sometimes be as much in favour of happiness as a very resolute character .
They got on fast .
Anne was astonished to recognise the same hills and the same objects so soon .
Their actual speed , heightened by some dread of the conclusion , made the road appear but half as long as on the day before .
It was growing quite dusk , however , before they were in the neighbourhood of Uppercross , and there had been total silence among them for some time , Henrietta leaning back in the corner , with a shawl over her face , giving the hope of her having cried herself to sleep ; when , as they were going up their last hill , Anne found herself all at once addressed by Captain Wentworth .
In a low , cautious voice , he said : -- '' I have been considering what we had best do .
She must not appear at first .
She could not stand it .
I have been thinking whether you had not better remain in the carriage with her , while I go in and break it to Mr and Mrs Musgrove .
Do you think this is a good plan ? ''
She did : he was satisfied , and said no more .
But the remembrance of the appeal remained a pleasure to her , as a proof of friendship , and of deference for her judgement , a great pleasure ; and when it became a sort of parting proof , its value did not lessen .
When the distressing communication at Uppercross was over , and he had seen the father and mother quite as composed as could be hoped , and the daughter all the better for being with them , he announced his intention of returning in the same carriage to Lyme ; and when the horses were baited , he was off .
( End of volume one . )
Chapter 13 The remainder of Anne 's time at Uppercross , comprehending only two days , was spent entirely at the Mansion House ; and she had the satisfaction of knowing herself extremely useful there , both as an immediate companion , and as assisting in all those arrangements for the future , which , in Mr and Mrs Musgrove 's distressed state of spirits , would have been difficulties .
They had an early account from Lyme the next morning .
Louisa was much the same .
No symptoms worse than before had appeared .
Charles came a few hours afterwards , to bring a later and more particular account .
He was tolerably cheerful .
A speedy cure must not be hoped , but everything was going on as well as the nature of the case admitted .
In speaking of the Harvilles , he seemed unable to satisfy his own sense of their kindness , especially of Mrs Harville 's exertions as a nurse .
`` She really left nothing for Mary to do .
He and Mary had been persuaded to go early to their inn last night .
Mary had been hysterical again this morning .
When he came away , she was going to walk out with Captain Benwick , which , he hoped , would do her good .
He almost wished she had been prevailed on to come home the day before ; but the truth was , that Mrs Harville left nothing for anybody to do . ''
Charles was to return to Lyme the same afternoon , and his father had at first half a mind to go with him , but the ladies could not consent .
It would be going only to multiply trouble to the others , and increase his own distress ; and a much better scheme followed and was acted upon .
A chaise was sent for from Crewkherne , and Charles conveyed back a far more useful person in the old nursery-maid of the family , one who having brought up all the children , and seen the very last , the lingering and long-petted Master Harry , sent to school after his brothers , was now living in her deserted nursery to mend stockings and dress all the blains and bruises she could get near her , and who , consequently , was only too happy in being allowed to go and help nurse dear Miss Louisa .
Vague wishes of getting Sarah thither , had occurred before to Mrs Musgrove and Henrietta ; but without Anne , it would hardly have been resolved on , and found practicable so soon .
They were indebted , the next day , to Charles Hayter , for all the minute knowledge of Louisa , which it was so essential to obtain every twenty-four hours .
He made it his business to go to Lyme , and his account was still encouraging .
The intervals of sense and consciousness were believed to be stronger .
Every report agreed in Captain Wentworth 's appearing fixed in Lyme .
Anne was to leave them on the morrow , an event which they all dreaded .
`` What should they do without her ?
They were wretched comforters for one another . ''
And so much was said in this way , that Anne thought she could not do better than impart among them the general inclination to which she was privy , and persuaded them all to go to Lyme at once .
She had little difficulty ; it was soon determined that they would go ; go to-morrow , fix themselves at the inn , or get into lodgings , as it suited , and there remain till dear Louisa could be moved .
They must be taking off some trouble from the good people she was with ; they might at least relieve Mrs Harville from the care of her own children ; and in short , they were so happy in the decision , that Anne was delighted with what she had done , and felt that she could not spend her last morning at Uppercross better than in assisting their preparations , and sending them off at an early hour , though her being left to the solitary range of the house was the consequence .
She was the last , excepting the little boys at the cottage , she was the very last , the only remaining one of all that had filled and animated both houses , of all that had given Uppercross its cheerful character .
A few days had made a change indeed !
If Louisa recovered , it would all be well again .
More than former happiness would be restored .
There could not be a doubt , to her mind there was none , of what would follow her recovery .
A few months hence , and the room now so deserted , occupied but by her silent , pensive self , might be filled again with all that was happy and gay , all that was glowing and bright in prosperous love , all that was most unlike Anne Elliot !
An hour 's complete leisure for such reflections as these , on a dark November day , a small thick rain almost blotting out the very few objects ever to be discerned from the windows , was enough to make the sound of Lady Russell 's carriage exceedingly welcome ; and yet , though desirous to be gone , she could not quit the Mansion House , or look an adieu to the Cottage , with its black , dripping and comfortless veranda , or even notice through the misty glasses the last humble tenements of the village , without a saddened heart .
Scenes had passed in Uppercross which made it precious .
It stood the record of many sensations of pain , once severe , but now softened ; and of some instances of relenting feeling , some breathings of friendship and reconciliation , which could never be looked for again , and which could never cease to be dear .
She left it all behind her , all but the recollection that such things had been .
Anne had never entered Kellynch since her quitting Lady Russell 's house in September .
It had not been necessary , and the few occasions of its being possible for her to go to the Hall she had contrived to evade and escape from .
Her first return was to resume her place in the modern and elegant apartments of the Lodge , and to gladden the eyes of its mistress .
There was some anxiety mixed with Lady Russell 's joy in meeting her .
She knew who had been frequenting Uppercross .
But happily , either Anne was improved in plumpness and looks , or Lady Russell fancied her so ; and Anne , in receiving her compliments on the occasion , had the amusement of connecting them with the silent admiration of her cousin , and of hoping that she was to be blessed with a second spring of youth and beauty .
When they came to converse , she was soon sensible of some mental change .
The subjects of which her heart had been full on leaving Kellynch , and which she had felt slighted , and been compelled to smother among the Musgroves , were now become but of secondary interest .
She had lately lost sight even of her father and sister and Bath .
Their concerns had been sunk under those of Uppercross ; and when Lady Russell reverted to their former hopes and fears , and spoke her satisfaction in the house in Camden Place , which had been taken , and her regret that Mrs Clay should still be with them , Anne would have been ashamed to have it known how much more she was thinking of Lyme and Louisa Musgrove , and all her acquaintance there ; how much more interesting to her was the home and the friendship of the Harvilles and Captain Benwick , than her own father 's house in Camden Place , or her own sister 's intimacy with Mrs Clay .
She was actually forced to exert herself to meet Lady Russell with anything like the appearance of equal solicitude , on topics which had by nature the first claim on her .
There was a little awkwardness at first in their discourse on another subject .
They must speak of the accident at Lyme .
Lady Russell had not been arrived five minutes the day before , when a full account of the whole had burst on her ; but still it must be talked of , she must make enquiries , she must regret the imprudence , lament the result , and Captain Wentworth 's name must be mentioned by both .
Anne was conscious of not doing it so well as Lady Russell .
She could not speak the name , and look straight forward to Lady Russell 's eye , till she had adopted the expedient of telling her briefly what she thought of the attachment between him and Louisa .
When this was told , his name distressed her no longer .
Lady Russell had only to listen composedly , and wish them happy , but internally her heart revelled in angry pleasure , in pleased contempt , that the man who at twenty-three had seemed to understand somewhat of the value of an Anne Elliot , should , eight years afterwards , be charmed by a Louisa Musgrove .
The first three or four days passed most quietly , with no circumstance to mark them excepting the receipt of a note or two from Lyme , which found their way to Anne , she could not tell how , and brought a rather improving account of Louisa .
At the end of that period , Lady Russell 's politeness could repose no longer , and the fainter self-threatenings of the past became in a decided tone , '' I must call on Mrs Croft ; I really must call upon her soon .
Anne , have you courage to go with me , and pay a visit in that house ?
It will be some trial to us both . ''
Anne did not shrink from it ; on the contrary , she truly felt as she said , in observing -- '' I think you are very likely to suffer the most of the two ; your feelings are less reconciled to the change than mine .
By remaining in the neighbourhood , I am become inured to it . ''
She could have said more on the subject ; for she had in fact so high an opinion of the Crofts , and considered her father so very fortunate in his tenants , felt the parish to be so sure of a good example , and the poor of the best attention and relief , that however sorry and ashamed for the necessity of the removal , she could not but in conscience feel that they were gone who deserved not to stay , and that Kellynch Hall had passed into better hands than its owners ' .
These convictions must unquestionably have their own pain , and severe was its kind ; but they precluded that pain which Lady Russell would suffer in entering the house again , and returning through the well-known apartments .
In such moments Anne had no power of saying to herself , '' These rooms ought to belong only to us .
Oh , how fallen in their destination !
How unworthily occupied !
An ancient family to be so driven away !
Strangers filling their place ! ''
No , except when she thought of her mother , and remembered where she had been used to sit and preside , she had no sigh of that description to heave .
Mrs Croft always met her with a kindness which gave her the pleasure of fancying herself a favourite , and on the present occasion , receiving her in that house , there was particular attention .
The sad accident at Lyme was soon the prevailing topic , and on comparing their latest accounts of the invalid , it appeared that each lady dated her intelligence from the same hour of yestermorn ; that Captain Wentworth had been in Kellynch yesterday ( the first time since the accident ) , had brought Anne the last note , which she had not been able to trace the exact steps of ; had staid a few hours and then returned again to Lyme , and without any present intention of quitting it any more .
He had enquired after her , she found , particularly ; had expressed his hope of Miss Elliot 's not being the worse for her exertions , and had spoken of those exertions as great .
This was handsome , and gave her more pleasure than almost anything else could have done .
As to the sad catastrophe itself , it could be canvassed only in one style by a couple of steady , sensible women , whose judgements had to work on ascertained events ; and it was perfectly decided that it had been the consequence of much thoughtlessness and much imprudence ; that its effects were most alarming , and that it was frightful to think , how long Miss Musgrove 's recovery might yet be doubtful , and how liable she would still remain to suffer from the concussion hereafter !
The Admiral wound it up summarily by exclaiming -- '' Ay , a very bad business indeed .
A new sort of way this , for a young fellow to be making love , by breaking his mistress 's head , is not it , Miss Elliot ?
This is breaking a head and giving a plaster , truly ! ''
Admiral Croft 's manners were not quite of the tone to suit Lady Russell , but they delighted Anne .
His goodness of heart and simplicity of character were irresistible .
`` Now , this must be very bad for you , '' said he , suddenly rousing from a little reverie , `` to be coming and finding us here .
I had not recollected it before , I declare , but it must be very bad .
But now , do not stand upon ceremony .
Get up and go over all the rooms in the house if you like it . ''
`` Another time , Sir , I thank you , not now . ''
`` Well , whenever it suits you .
You can slip in from the shrubbery at any time ; and there you will find we keep our umbrellas hanging up by that door .
A good place is not it ?
But , '' ( checking himself ) , '' you will not think it a good place , for yours were always kept in the butler 's room .
Ay , so it always is , I believe .
One man 's ways may be as good as another 's , but we all like our own best .
And so you must judge for yourself , whether it would be better for you to go about the house or not . ''
Anne , finding she might decline it , did so , very gratefully .
`` We have made very few changes either , '' continued the Admiral , after thinking a moment .
`` Very few .
We told you about the laundry-door , at Uppercross .
That has been a very great improvement .
The wonder was , how any family upon earth could bear with the inconvenience of its opening as it did , so long !
You will tell Sir Walter what we have done , and that Mr Shepherd thinks it the greatest improvement the house ever had .
Indeed , I must do ourselves the justice to say , that the few alterations we have made have been all very much for the better .
My wife should have the credit of them , however .
I have done very little besides sending away some of the large looking-glasses from my dressing-room , which was your father 's .
A very good man , and very much the gentleman I am sure : but I should think , Miss Elliot , '' ( looking with serious reflection ) , '' I should think he must be rather a dressy man for his time of life .
Such a number of looking-glasses !
oh Lord !
there was no getting away from one 's self .
So I got Sophy to lend me a hand , and we soon shifted their quarters ; and now I am quite snug , with my little shaving glass in one corner , and another great thing that I never go near . ''
Anne , amused in spite of herself , was rather distressed for an answer , and the Admiral , fearing he might not have been civil enough , took up the subject again , to say -- '' The next time you write to your good father , Miss Elliot , pray give him my compliments and Mrs Croft 's , and say that we are settled here quite to our liking , and have no fault at all to find with the place .
The breakfast-room chimney smokes a little , I grant you , but it is only when the wind is due north and blows hard , which may not happen three times a winter .
And take it altogether , now that we have been into most of the houses hereabouts and can judge , there is not one that we like better than this .
Pray say so , with my compliments .
He will be glad to hear it . ''
Lady Russell and Mrs Croft were very well pleased with each other : but the acquaintance which this visit began was fated not to proceed far at present ; for when it was returned , the Crofts announced themselves to be going away for a few weeks , to visit their connexions in the north of the county , and probably might not be at home again before Lady Russell would be removing to Bath .
So ended all danger to Anne of meeting Captain Wentworth at Kellynch Hall , or of seeing him in company with her friend .
Everything was safe enough , and she smiled over the many anxious feelings she had wasted on the subject .
Chapter 14 Though Charles and Mary had remained at Lyme much longer after Mr and Mrs Musgrove 's going than Anne conceived they could have been at all wanted , they were yet the first of the family to be at home again ; and as soon as possible after their return to Uppercross they drove over to the Lodge .
They had left Louisa beginning to sit up ; but her head , though clear , was exceedingly weak , and her nerves susceptible to the highest extreme of tenderness ; and though she might be pronounced to be altogether doing very well , it was still impossible to say when she might be able to bear the removal home ; and her father and mother , who must return in time to receive their younger children for the Christmas holidays , had hardly a hope of being allowed to bring her with them .
They had been all in lodgings together .
Mrs Musgrove had got Mrs Harville 's children away as much as she could , every possible supply from Uppercross had been furnished , to lighten the inconvenience to the Harvilles , while the Harvilles had been wanting them to come to dinner every day ; and in short , it seemed to have been only a struggle on each side as to which should be most disinterested and hospitable .
Mary had had her evils ; but upon the whole , as was evident by her staying so long , she had found more to enjoy than to suffer .
Charles Hayter had been at Lyme oftener than suited her ; and when they dined with the Harvilles there had been only a maid-servant to wait , and at first Mrs Harville had always given Mrs Musgrove precedence ; but then , she had received so very handsome an apology from her on finding out whose daughter she was , and there had been so much going on every day , there had been so many walks between their lodgings and the Harvilles , and she had got books from the library , and changed them so often , that the balance had certainly been much in favour of Lyme .
She had been taken to Charmouth too , and she had bathed , and she had gone to church , and there were a great many more people to look at in the church at Lyme than at Uppercross ; and all this , joined to the sense of being so very useful , had made really an agreeable fortnight .
Anne enquired after Captain Benwick , Mary 's face was clouded directly .
Charles laughed .
`` Oh !
Captain Benwick is very well , I believe , but he is a very odd young man .
I do not know what he would be at .
We asked him to come home with us for a day or two : Charles undertook to give him some shooting , and he seemed quite delighted , and , for my part , I thought it was all settled ; when behold !
on Tuesday night , he made a very awkward sort of excuse ; ` he never shot ' and he had ` been quite misunderstood , ' and he had promised this and he had promised that , and the end of it was , I found , that he did not mean to come .
I suppose he was afraid of finding it dull ; but upon my word I should have thought we were lively enough at the Cottage for such a heart-broken man as Captain Benwick . ''
Charles laughed again and said , `` Now Mary , you know very well how it really was .
It was all your doing , '' ( turning to Anne . )
`` He fancied that if he went with us , he should find you close by : he fancied everybody to be living in Uppercross ; and when he discovered that Lady Russell lived three miles off , his heart failed him , and he had not courage to come .
That is the fact , upon my honour , Mary knows it is . ''
But Mary did not give into it very graciously , whether from not considering Captain Benwick entitled by birth and situation to be in love with an Elliot , or from not wanting to believe Anne a greater attraction to Uppercross than herself , must be left to be guessed .
Anne 's good-will , however , was not to be lessened by what she heard .
She boldly acknowledged herself flattered , and continued her enquiries .
`` Oh !
he talks of you , '' cried Charles , `` in such terms -- '' Mary interrupted him .
`` I declare , Charles , I never heard him mention Anne twice all the time I was there .
I declare , Anne , he never talks of you at all . ''
`` No , '' admitted Charles , `` I do not know that he ever does , in a general way ; but however , it is a very clear thing that he admires you exceedingly .
His head is full of some books that he is reading upon your recommendation , and he wants to talk to you about them ; he has found out something or other in one of them which he thinks -- oh !
I can not pretend to remember it , but it was something very fine -- I overheard him telling Henrietta all about it ; and then ` Miss Elliot ' was spoken of in the highest terms !
Now Mary , I declare it was so , I heard it myself , and you were in the other room .
` Elegance , sweetness , beauty . '
Oh !
there was no end of Miss Elliot 's charms . ''
`` And I am sure , '' cried Mary , warmly , `` it was a very little to his credit , if he did .
Miss Harville only died last June .
Such a heart is very little worth having ; is it , Lady Russell ?
I am sure you will agree with me . ''
`` I must see Captain Benwick before I decide , '' said Lady Russell , smiling .
`` And that you are very likely to do very soon , I can tell you , ma'am , '' said Charles .
`` Though he had not nerves for coming away with us , and setting off again afterwards to pay a formal visit here , he will make his way over to Kellynch one day by himself , you may depend on it .
I told him the distance and the road , and I told him of the church 's being so very well worth seeing ; for as he has a taste for those sort of things , I thought that would be a good excuse , and he listened with all his understanding and soul ; and I am sure from his manner that you will have him calling here soon .
So , I give you notice , Lady Russell . ''
`` Any acquaintance of Anne 's will always be welcome to me , '' was Lady Russell 's kind answer .
`` Oh !
as to being Anne 's acquaintance , '' said Mary , `` I think he is rather my acquaintance , for I have been seeing him every day this last fortnight . ''
`` Well , as your joint acquaintance , then , I shall be very happy to see Captain Benwick . ''
`` You will not find anything very agreeable in him , I assure you , ma'am .
He is one of the dullest young men that ever lived .
He has walked with me , sometimes , from one end of the sands to the other , without saying a word .
He is not at all a well-bred young man .
I am sure you will not like him . ''
`` There we differ , Mary , '' said Anne .
`` I think Lady Russell would like him .
I think she would be so much pleased with his mind , that she would very soon see no deficiency in his manner . ''
`` So do I , Anne , '' said Charles .
`` I am sure Lady Russell would like him .
He is just Lady Russell 's sort .
Give him a book , and he will read all day long . ''
`` Yes , that he will ! ''
exclaimed Mary , tauntingly .
`` He will sit poring over his book , and not know when a person speaks to him , or when one drop 's one 's scissors , or anything that happens .
Do you think Lady Russell would like that ? ''
Lady Russell could not help laughing .
`` Upon my word , '' said she , '' I should not have supposed that my opinion of any one could have admitted of such difference of conjecture , steady and matter of fact as I may call myself .
I have really a curiosity to see the person who can give occasion to such directly opposite notions .
I wish he may be induced to call here .
And when he does , Mary , you may depend upon hearing my opinion ; but I am determined not to judge him beforehand . ''
`` You will not like him , I will answer for it . ''
Lady Russell began talking of something else .
Mary spoke with animation of their meeting with , or rather missing , Mr Elliot so extraordinarily .
`` He is a man , '' said Lady Russell , `` whom I have no wish to see .
His declining to be on cordial terms with the head of his family , has left a very strong impression in his disfavour with me . ''
This decision checked Mary 's eagerness , and stopped her short in the midst of the Elliot countenance .
With regard to Captain Wentworth , though Anne hazarded no enquiries , there was voluntary communication sufficient .
His spirits had been greatly recovering lately as might be expected .
As Louisa improved , he had improved , and he was now quite a different creature from what he had been the first week .
He had not seen Louisa ; and was so extremely fearful of any ill consequence to her from an interview , that he did not press for it at all ; and , on the contrary , seemed to have a plan of going away for a week or ten days , till her head was stronger .
He had talked of going down to Plymouth for a week , and wanted to persuade Captain Benwick to go with him ; but , as Charles maintained to the last , Captain Benwick seemed much more disposed to ride over to Kellynch .
There can be no doubt that Lady Russell and Anne were both occasionally thinking of Captain Benwick , from this time .
Lady Russell could not hear the door-bell without feeling that it might be his herald ; nor could Anne return from any stroll of solitary indulgence in her father 's grounds , or any visit of charity in the village , without wondering whether she might see him or hear of him .
Captain Benwick came not , however .
He was either less disposed for it than Charles had imagined , or he was too shy ; and after giving him a week 's indulgence , Lady Russell determined him to be unworthy of the interest which he had been beginning to excite .
The Musgroves came back to receive their happy boys and girls from school , bringing with them Mrs Harville 's little children , to improve the noise of Uppercross , and lessen that of Lyme .
Henrietta remained with Louisa ; but all the rest of the family were again in their usual quarters .
Lady Russell and Anne paid their compliments to them once , when Anne could not but feel that Uppercross was already quite alive again .
Though neither Henrietta , nor Louisa , nor Charles Hayter , nor Captain Wentworth were there , the room presented as strong a contrast as could be wished to the last state she had seen it in .
Immediately surrounding Mrs Musgrove were the little Harvilles , whom she was sedulously guarding from the tyranny of the two children from the Cottage , expressly arrived to amuse them .
On one side was a table occupied by some chattering girls , cutting up silk and gold paper ; and on the other were tressels and trays , bending under the weight of brawn and cold pies , where riotous boys were holding high revel ; the whole completed by a roaring Christmas fire , which seemed determined to be heard , in spite of all the noise of the others .
Charles and Mary also came in , of course , during their visit , and Mr Musgrove made a point of paying his respects to Lady Russell , and sat down close to her for ten minutes , talking with a very raised voice , but from the clamour of the children on his knees , generally in vain .
It was a fine family-piece .
Anne , judging from her own temperament , would have deemed such a domestic hurricane a bad restorative of the nerves , which Louisa 's illness must have so greatly shaken .
But Mrs Musgrove , who got Anne near her on purpose to thank her most cordially , again and again , for all her attentions to them , concluded a short recapitulation of what she had suffered herself by observing , with a happy glance round the room , that after all she had gone through , nothing was so likely to do her good as a little quiet cheerfulness at home .
Louisa was now recovering apace .
Her mother could even think of her being able to join their party at home , before her brothers and sisters went to school again .
The Harvilles had promised to come with her and stay at Uppercross , whenever she returned .
Captain Wentworth was gone , for the present , to see his brother in Shropshire .
`` I hope I shall remember , in future , '' said Lady Russell , as soon as they were reseated in the carriage , `` not to call at Uppercross in the Christmas holidays . ''
Everybody has their taste in noises as well as in other matters ; and sounds are quite innoxious , or most distressing , by their sort rather than their quantity .
When Lady Russell not long afterwards , was entering Bath on a wet afternoon , and driving through the long course of streets from the Old Bridge to Camden Place , amidst the dash of other carriages , the heavy rumble of carts and drays , the bawling of newspapermen , muffin-men and milkmen , and the ceaseless clink of pattens , she made no complaint .
No , these were noises which belonged to the winter pleasures ; her spirits rose under their influence ; and like Mrs Musgrove , she was feeling , though not saying , that after being long in the country , nothing could be so good for her as a little quiet cheerfulness .
Anne did not share these feelings .
She persisted in a very determined , though very silent disinclination for Bath ; caught the first dim view of the extensive buildings , smoking in rain , without any wish of seeing them better ; felt their progress through the streets to be , however disagreeable , yet too rapid ; for who would be glad to see her when she arrived ?
And looked back , with fond regret , to the bustles of Uppercross and the seclusion of Kellynch .
Elizabeth 's last letter had communicated a piece of news of some interest .
Mr Elliot was in Bath .
He had called in Camden Place ; had called a second time , a third ; had been pointedly attentive .
If Elizabeth and her father did not deceive themselves , had been taking much pains to seek the acquaintance , and proclaim the value of the connection , as he had formerly taken pains to shew neglect .
This was very wonderful if it were true ; and Lady Russell was in a state of very agreeable curiosity and perplexity about Mr Elliot , already recanting the sentiment she had so lately expressed to Mary , of his being `` a man whom she had no wish to see . ''
She had a great wish to see him .
If he really sought to reconcile himself like a dutiful branch , he must be forgiven for having dismembered himself from the paternal tree .
Anne was not animated to an equal pitch by the circumstance , but she felt that she would rather see Mr Elliot again than not , which was more than she could say for many other persons in Bath .
She was put down in Camden Place ; and Lady Russell then drove to her own lodgings , in Rivers Street .
Chapter 15 Sir Walter had taken a very good house in Camden Place , a lofty dignified situation , such as becomes a man of consequence ; and both he and Elizabeth were settled there , much to their satisfaction .
Anne entered it with a sinking heart , anticipating an imprisonment of many months , and anxiously saying to herself , `` Oh !
when shall I leave you again ? ''
A degree of unexpected cordiality , however , in the welcome she received , did her good .
Her father and sister were glad to see her , for the sake of shewing her the house and furniture , and met her with kindness .
Her making a fourth , when they sat down to dinner , was noticed as an advantage .
Mrs Clay was very pleasant , and very smiling , but her courtesies and smiles were more a matter of course .
Anne had always felt that she would pretend what was proper on her arrival , but the complaisance of the others was unlooked for .
They were evidently in excellent spirits , and she was soon to listen to the causes .
They had no inclination to listen to her .
After laying out for some compliments of being deeply regretted in their old neighbourhood , which Anne could not pay , they had only a few faint enquiries to make , before the talk must be all their own .
Uppercross excited no interest , Kellynch very little : it was all Bath .
They had the pleasure of assuring her that Bath more than answered their expectations in every respect .
Their house was undoubtedly the best in Camden Place ; their drawing-rooms had many decided advantages over all the others which they had either seen or heard of , and the superiority was not less in the style of the fitting-up , or the taste of the furniture .
Their acquaintance was exceedingly sought after .
Everybody was wanting to visit them .
They had drawn back from many introductions , and still were perpetually having cards left by people of whom they knew nothing .
Here were funds of enjoyment .
Could Anne wonder that her father and sister were happy ?
She might not wonder , but she must sigh that her father should feel no degradation in his change , should see nothing to regret in the duties and dignity of the resident landholder , should find so much to be vain of in the littlenesses of a town ; and she must sigh , and smile , and wonder too , as Elizabeth threw open the folding-doors and walked with exultation from one drawing-room to the other , boasting of their space ; at the possibility of that woman , who had been mistress of Kellynch Hall , finding extent to be proud of between two walls , perhaps thirty feet asunder .
But this was not all which they had to make them happy .
They had Mr Elliot too .
Anne had a great deal to hear of Mr Elliot .
He was not only pardoned , they were delighted with him .
He had been in Bath about a fortnight ; ( he had passed through Bath in November , in his way to London , when the intelligence of Sir Walter 's being settled there had of course reached him , though only twenty-four hours in the place , but he had not been able to avail himself of it ; ) but he had now been a fortnight in Bath , and his first object on arriving , had been to leave his card in Camden Place , following it up by such assiduous endeavours to meet , and when they did meet , by such great openness of conduct , such readiness to apologize for the past , such solicitude to be received as a relation again , that their former good understanding was completely re-established .
They had not a fault to find in him .
He had explained away all the appearance of neglect on his own side .
It had originated in misapprehension entirely .
He had never had an idea of throwing himself off ; he had feared that he was thrown off , but knew not why , and delicacy had kept him silent .
Upon the hint of having spoken disrespectfully or carelessly of the family and the family honours , he was quite indignant .
He , who had ever boasted of being an Elliot , and whose feelings , as to connection , were only too strict to suit the unfeudal tone of the present day .
He was astonished , indeed , but his character and general conduct must refute it .
He could refer Sir Walter to all who knew him ; and certainly , the pains he had been taking on this , the first opportunity of reconciliation , to be restored to the footing of a relation and heir-presumptive , was a strong proof of his opinions on the subject .
The circumstances of his marriage , too , were found to admit of much extenuation .
This was an article not to be entered on by himself ; but a very intimate friend of his , a Colonel Wallis , a highly respectable man , perfectly the gentleman , ( and not an ill-looking man , Sir Walter added ) , who was living in very good style in Marlborough Buildings , and had , at his own particular request , been admitted to their acquaintance through Mr Elliot , had mentioned one or two things relative to the marriage , which made a material difference in the discredit of it .
Colonel Wallis had known Mr Elliot long , had been well acquainted also with his wife , had perfectly understood the whole story .
She was certainly not a woman of family , but well educated , accomplished , rich , and excessively in love with his friend .
There had been the charm .
She had sought him .
Without that attraction , not all her money would have tempted Elliot , and Sir Walter was , moreover , assured of her having been a very fine woman .
Here was a great deal to soften the business .
A very fine woman with a large fortune , in love with him !
Sir Walter seemed to admit it as complete apology ; and though Elizabeth could not see the circumstance in quite so favourable a light , she allowed it be a great extenuation .
Mr Elliot had called repeatedly , had dined with them once , evidently delighted by the distinction of being asked , for they gave no dinners in general ; delighted , in short , by every proof of cousinly notice , and placing his whole happiness in being on intimate terms in Camden Place .
Anne listened , but without quite understanding it .
Allowances , large allowances , she knew , must be made for the ideas of those who spoke .
She heard it all under embellishment .
All that sounded extravagant or irrational in the progress of the reconciliation might have no origin but in the language of the relators .
Still , however , she had the sensation of there being something more than immediately appeared , in Mr Elliot 's wishing , after an interval of so many years , to be well received by them .
In a worldly view , he had nothing to gain by being on terms with Sir Walter ; nothing to risk by a state of variance .
In all probability he was already the richer of the two , and the Kellynch estate would as surely be his hereafter as the title .
A sensible man , and he had looked like a very sensible man , why should it be an object to him ?
She could only offer one solution ; it was , perhaps , for Elizabeth 's sake .
There might really have been a liking formerly , though convenience and accident had drawn him a different way ; and now that he could afford to please himself , he might mean to pay his addresses to her .
Elizabeth was certainly very handsome , with well-bred , elegant manners , and her character might never have been penetrated by Mr Elliot , knowing her but in public , and when very young himself .
How her temper and understanding might bear the investigation of his present keener time of life was another concern and rather a fearful one .
Most earnestly did she wish that he might not be too nice , or too observant if Elizabeth were his object ; and that Elizabeth was disposed to believe herself so , and that her friend Mrs Clay was encouraging the idea , seemed apparent by a glance or two between them , while Mr Elliot 's frequent visits were talked of .
Anne mentioned the glimpses she had had of him at Lyme , but without being much attended to .
`` Oh !
yes , perhaps , it had been Mr Elliot .
They did not know .
It might be him , perhaps . ''
They could not listen to her description of him .
They were describing him themselves ; Sir Walter especially .
He did justice to his very gentlemanlike appearance , his air of elegance and fashion , his good shaped face , his sensible eye ; but , at the same time , `` must lament his being very much under-hung , a defect which time seemed to have increased ; nor could he pretend to say that ten years had not altered almost every feature for the worse .
Mr Elliot appeared to think that he ( Sir Walter ) was looking exactly as he had done when they last parted ; '' but Sir Walter had `` not been able to return the compliment entirely , which had embarrassed him .
He did not mean to complain , however .
Mr Elliot was better to look at than most men , and he had no objection to being seen with him anywhere . ''
Mr Elliot , and his friends in Marlborough Buildings , were talked of the whole evening .
`` Colonel Wallis had been so impatient to be introduced to them !
and Mr Elliot so anxious that he should ! ''
and there was a Mrs Wallis , at present known only to them by description , as she was in daily expectation of her confinement ; but Mr Elliot spoke of her as `` a most charming woman , quite worthy of being known in Camden Place , '' and as soon as she recovered they were to be acquainted .
Sir Walter thought much of Mrs Wallis ; she was said to be an excessively pretty woman , beautiful .
`` He longed to see her .
He hoped she might make some amends for the many very plain faces he was continually passing in the streets .
The worst of Bath was the number of its plain women .
He did not mean to say that there were no pretty women , but the number of the plain was out of all proportion .
He had frequently observed , as he walked , that one handsome face would be followed by thirty , or five-and-thirty frights ; and once , as he had stood in a shop on Bond Street , he had counted eighty-seven women go by , one after another , without there being a tolerable face among them .
It had been a frosty morning , to be sure , a sharp frost , which hardly one woman in a thousand could stand the test of .
But still , there certainly were a dreadful multitude of ugly women in Bath ; and as for the men !
they were infinitely worse .
Such scarecrows as the streets were full of !
It was evident how little the women were used to the sight of anything tolerable , by the effect which a man of decent appearance produced .
He had never walked anywhere arm-in-arm with Colonel Wallis ( who was a fine military figure , though sandy-haired ) without observing that every woman 's eye was upon him ; every woman 's eye was sure to be upon Colonel Wallis . ''
Modest Sir Walter !
He was not allowed to escape , however .
His daughter and Mrs Clay united in hinting that Colonel Wallis 's companion might have as good a figure as Colonel Wallis , and certainly was not sandy-haired .
`` How is Mary looking ? ''
said Sir Walter , in the height of his good humour .
`` The last time I saw her she had a red nose , but I hope that may not happen every day . ''
`` Oh !
no , that must have been quite accidental .
In general she has been in very good health and very good looks since Michaelmas . ''
`` If I thought it would not tempt her to go out in sharp winds , and grow coarse , I would send her a new hat and pelisse . ''
Anne was considering whether she should venture to suggest that a gown , or a cap , would not be liable to any such misuse , when a knock at the door suspended everything .
`` A knock at the door !
and so late !
It was ten o'clock .
Could it be Mr Elliot ?
They knew he was to dine in Lansdown Crescent .
It was possible that he might stop in his way home to ask them how they did .
They could think of no one else .
Mrs Clay decidedly thought it Mr Elliot 's knock . ''
Mrs Clay was right .
With all the state which a butler and foot-boy could give , Mr Elliot was ushered into the room .
It was the same , the very same man , with no difference but of dress .
Anne drew a little back , while the others received his compliments , and her sister his apologies for calling at so unusual an hour , but `` he could not be so near without wishing to know that neither she nor her friend had taken cold the day before , '' & c .
& c ; which was all as politely done , and as politely taken , as possible , but her part must follow then .
Sir Walter talked of his youngest daughter ; '' Mr Elliot must give him leave to present him to his youngest daughter '' ( there was no occasion for remembering Mary ) ; and Anne , smiling and blushing , very becomingly shewed to Mr Elliot the pretty features which he had by no means forgotten , and instantly saw , with amusement at his little start of surprise , that he had not been at all aware of who she was .
He looked completely astonished , but not more astonished than pleased ; his eyes brightened !
and with the most perfect alacrity he welcomed the relationship , alluded to the past , and entreated to be received as an acquaintance already .
He was quite as good-looking as he had appeared at Lyme , his countenance improved by speaking , and his manners were so exactly what they ought to be , so polished , so easy , so particularly agreeable , that she could compare them in excellence to only one person 's manners .
They were not the same , but they were , perhaps , equally good .
He sat down with them , and improved their conversation very much .
There could be no doubt of his being a sensible man .
Ten minutes were enough to certify that .
His tone , his expressions , his choice of subject , his knowing where to stop ; it was all the operation of a sensible , discerning mind .
As soon as he could , he began to talk to her of Lyme , wanting to compare opinions respecting the place , but especially wanting to speak of the circumstance of their happening to be guests in the same inn at the same time ; to give his own route , understand something of hers , and regret that he should have lost such an opportunity of paying his respects to her .
She gave him a short account of her party and business at Lyme .
His regret increased as he listened .
He had spent his whole solitary evening in the room adjoining theirs ; had heard voices , mirth continually ; thought they must be a most delightful set of people , longed to be with them , but certainly without the smallest suspicion of his possessing the shadow of a right to introduce himself .
If he had but asked who the party were !
The name of Musgrove would have told him enough .
`` Well , it would serve to cure him of an absurd practice of never asking a question at an inn , which he had adopted , when quite a young man , on the principal of its being very ungenteel to be curious .
`` The notions of a young man of one or two and twenty , '' said he , '' as to what is necessary in manners to make him quite the thing , are more absurd , I believe , than those of any other set of beings in the world .
The folly of the means they often employ is only to be equalled by the folly of what they have in view . ''
But he must not be addressing his reflections to Anne alone : he knew it ; he was soon diffused again among the others , and it was only at intervals that he could return to Lyme .
His enquiries , however , produced at length an account of the scene she had been engaged in there , soon after his leaving the place .
Having alluded to `` an accident , '' he must hear the whole .
When he questioned , Sir Walter and Elizabeth began to question also , but the difference in their manner of doing it could not be unfelt .
She could only compare Mr Elliot to Lady Russell , in the wish of really comprehending what had passed , and in the degree of concern for what she must have suffered in witnessing it .
He staid an hour with them .
The elegant little clock on the mantel- piece had struck `` eleven with its silver sounds , '' and the watchman was beginning to be heard at a distance telling the same tale , before Mr Elliot or any of them seemed to feel that he had been there long .
Anne could not have supposed it possible that her first evening in Camden Place could have passed so well !
Chapter 16 There was one point which Anne , on returning to her family , would have been more thankful to ascertain even than Mr Elliot's being in love with Elizabeth , which was , her father 's not being in love with Mrs Clay ; and she was very far from easy about it , when she had been at home a few hours .
On going down to breakfast the next morning , she found there had just been a decent pretence on the lady 's side of meaning to leave them .
She could imagine Mrs Clay to have said , that `` now Miss Anne was come , she could not suppose herself at all wanted ; '' for Elizabeth was replying in a sort of whisper , '' That must not be any reason , indeed .
I assure you I feel it none .
She is nothing to me , compared with you ; '' and she was in full time to hear her father say , `` My dear madam , this must not be .
As yet , you have seen nothing of Bath .
You have been here only to be useful .
You must not run away from us now .
You must stay to be acquainted with Mrs Wallis , the beautiful Mrs Wallis .
To your fine mind , I well know the sight of beauty is a real gratification . ''
He spoke and looked so much in earnest , that Anne was not surprised to see Mrs Clay stealing a glance at Elizabeth and herself .
Her countenance , perhaps , might express some watchfulness ; but the praise of the fine mind did not appear to excite a thought in her sister .
The lady could not but yield to such joint entreaties , and promise to stay .
In the course of the same morning , Anne and her father chancing to be alone together , he began to compliment her on her improved looks ; he thought her `` less thin in her person , in her cheeks ; her skin , her complexion , greatly improved ; clearer , fresher .
Had she been using any thing in particular ? ''
`` No , nothing . ''
`` Merely Gowland , '' he supposed .
`` No , nothing at all . ''
`` Ha !
he was surprised at that ; '' and added , `` certainly you can not do better than to continue as you are ; you can not be better than well ; or I should recommend Gowland , the constant use of Gowland , during the spring months .
Mrs Clay has been using it at my recommendation , and you see what it has done for her .
You see how it has carried away her freckles . ''
If Elizabeth could but have heard this !
Such personal praise might have struck her , especially as it did not appear to Anne that the freckles were at all lessened .
But everything must take its chance .
The evil of a marriage would be much diminished , if Elizabeth were also to marry .
As for herself , she might always command a home with Lady Russell .
Lady Russell 's composed mind and polite manners were put to some trial on this point , in her intercourse in Camden Place .
The sight of Mrs Clay in such favour , and of Anne so overlooked , was a perpetual provocation to her there ; and vexed her as much when she was away , as a person in Bath who drinks the water , gets all the new publications , and has a very large acquaintance , has time to be vexed .
As Mr Elliot became known to her , she grew more charitable , or more indifferent , towards the others .
His manners were an immediate recommendation ; and on conversing with him she found the solid so fully supporting the superficial , that she was at first , as she told Anne , almost ready to exclaim , `` Can this be Mr Elliot ? ''
and could not seriously picture to herself a more agreeable or estimable man .
Everything united in him ; good understanding , correct opinions , knowledge of the world , and a warm heart .
He had strong feelings of family attachment and family honour , without pride or weakness ; he lived with the liberality of a man of fortune , without display ; he judged for himself in everything essential , without defying public opinion in any point of worldly decorum .
He was steady , observant , moderate , candid ; never run away with by spirits or by selfishness , which fancied itself strong feeling ; and yet , with a sensibility to what was amiable and lovely , and a value for all the felicities of domestic life , which characters of fancied enthusiasm and violent agitation seldom really possess .
She was sure that he had not been happy in marriage .
Colonel Wallis said it , and Lady Russell saw it ; but it had been no unhappiness to sour his mind , nor ( she began pretty soon to suspect ) to prevent his thinking of a second choice .
Her satisfaction in Mr Elliot outweighed all the plague of Mrs Clay .
It was now some years since Anne had begun to learn that she and her excellent friend could sometimes think differently ; and it did not surprise her , therefore , that Lady Russell should see nothing suspicious or inconsistent , nothing to require more motives than appeared , in Mr Elliot 's great desire of a reconciliation .
In Lady Russell 's view , it was perfectly natural that Mr Elliot , at a mature time of life , should feel it a most desirable object , and what would very generally recommend him among all sensible people , to be on good terms with the head of his family ; the simplest process in the world of time upon a head naturally clear , and only erring in the heyday of youth .
Anne presumed , however , still to smile about it , and at last to mention `` Elizabeth . ''
Lady Russell listened , and looked , and made only this cautious reply : -- '' Elizabeth !
very well ; time will explain . ''
It was a reference to the future , which Anne , after a little observation , felt she must submit to .
She could determine nothing at present .
In that house Elizabeth must be first ; and she was in the habit of such general observance as `` Miss Elliot , '' that any particularity of attention seemed almost impossible .
Mr Elliot , too , it must be remembered , had not been a widower seven months .
A little delay on his side might be very excusable .
In fact , Anne could never see the crape round his hat , without fearing that she was the inexcusable one , in attributing to him such imaginations ; for though his marriage had not been very happy , still it had existed so many years that she could not comprehend a very rapid recovery from the awful impression of its being dissolved .
However it might end , he was without any question their pleasantest acquaintance in Bath : she saw nobody equal to him ; and it was a great indulgence now and then to talk to him about Lyme , which he seemed to have as lively a wish to see again , and to see more of , as herself .
They went through the particulars of their first meeting a great many times .
He gave her to understand that he had looked at her with some earnestness .
She knew it well ; and she remembered another person 's look also .
They did not always think alike .
His value for rank and connexion she perceived was greater than hers .
It was not merely complaisance , it must be a liking to the cause , which made him enter warmly into her father and sister 's solicitudes on a subject which she thought unworthy to excite them .
The Bath paper one morning announced the arrival of the Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple , and her daughter , the Honourable Miss Carteret ; and all the comfort of No. -- , Camden Place , was swept away for many days ; for the Dalrymples ( in Anne 's opinion , most unfortunately ) were cousins of the Elliots ; and the agony was how to introduce themselves properly .
Anne had never seen her father and sister before in contact with nobility , and she must acknowledge herself disappointed .
She had hoped better things from their high ideas of their own situation in life , and was reduced to form a wish which she had never foreseen ; a wish that they had more pride ; for `` our cousins Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret ; '' `` our cousins , the Dalrymples , '' sounded in her ears all day long .
Sir Walter had once been in company with the late viscount , but had never seen any of the rest of the family ; and the difficulties of the case arose from there having been a suspension of all intercourse by letters of ceremony , ever since the death of that said late viscount , when , in consequence of a dangerous illness of Sir Walter's at the same time , there had been an unlucky omission at Kellynch .
No letter of condolence had been sent to Ireland .
The neglect had been visited on the head of the sinner ; for when poor Lady Elliot died herself , no letter of condolence was received at Kellynch , and , consequently , there was but too much reason to apprehend that the Dalrymples considered the relationship as closed .
How to have this anxious business set to rights , and be admitted as cousins again , was the question : and it was a question which , in a more rational manner , neither Lady Russell nor Mr Elliot thought unimportant .
`` Family connexions were always worth preserving , good company always worth seeking ; Lady Dalrymple had taken a house , for three months , in Laura Place , and would be living in style .
She had been at Bath the year before , and Lady Russell had heard her spoken of as a charming woman .
It was very desirable that the connexion should be renewed , if it could be done , without any compromise of propriety on the side of the Elliots . ''
Sir Walter , however , would choose his own means , and at last wrote a very fine letter of ample explanation , regret , and entreaty , to his right honourable cousin .
Neither Lady Russell nor Mr Elliot could admire the letter ; but it did all that was wanted , in bringing three lines of scrawl from the Dowager Viscountess .
`` She was very much honoured , and should be happy in their acquaintance . ''
The toils of the business were over , the sweets began .
They visited in Laura Place , they had the cards of Dowager Viscountess Dalrymple , and the Honourable Miss Carteret , to be arranged wherever they might be most visible : and `` Our cousins in Laura Place , '' -- '' Our cousin , Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret , '' were talked of to everybody .
Anne was ashamed .
Had Lady Dalrymple and her daughter even been very agreeable , she would still have been ashamed of the agitation they created , but they were nothing .
There was no superiority of manner , accomplishment , or understanding .
Lady Dalrymple had acquired the name of `` a charming woman , '' because she had a smile and a civil answer for everybody .
Miss Carteret , with still less to say , was so plain and so awkward , that she would never have been tolerated in Camden Place but for her birth .
Lady Russell confessed she had expected something better ; but yet '' it was an acquaintance worth having ; '' and when Anne ventured to speak her opinion of them to Mr Elliot , he agreed to their being nothing in themselves , but still maintained that , as a family connexion , as good company , as those who would collect good company around them , they had their value .
Anne smiled and said , '' My idea of good company , Mr Elliot , is the company of clever , well-informed people , who have a great deal of conversation ; that is what I call good company . ''
`` You are mistaken , '' said he gently , `` that is not good company ; that is the best .
Good company requires only birth , education , and manners , and with regard to education is not very nice .
Birth and good manners are essential ; but a little learning is by no means a dangerous thing in good company ; on the contrary , it will do very well .
My cousin Anne shakes her head .
She is not satisfied .
She is fastidious .
My dear cousin '' ( sitting down by her ) , `` you have a better right to be fastidious than almost any other woman I know ; but will it answer ?
Will it make you happy ?
Will it not be wiser to accept the society of those good ladies in Laura Place , and enjoy all the advantages of the connexion as far as possible ?
You may depend upon it , that they will move in the first set in Bath this winter , and as rank is rank , your being known to be related to them will have its use in fixing your family ( our family let me say ) in that degree of consideration which we must all wish for . ''
`` Yes , '' sighed Anne , `` we shall , indeed , be known to be related to them ! ''
then recollecting herself , and not wishing to be answered , she added , '' I certainly do think there has been by far too much trouble taken to procure the acquaintance .
I suppose '' ( smiling ) `` I have more pride than any of you ; but I confess it does vex me , that we should be so solicitous to have the relationship acknowledged , which we may be very sure is a matter of perfect indifference to them . ''
`` Pardon me , dear cousin , you are unjust in your own claims .
In London , perhaps , in your present quiet style of living , it might be as you say : but in Bath ; Sir Walter Elliot and his family will always be worth knowing : always acceptable as acquaintance . ''
`` Well , '' said Anne , `` I certainly am proud , too proud to enjoy a welcome which depends so entirely upon place . ''
`` I love your indignation , '' said he ; `` it is very natural .
But here you are in Bath , and the object is to be established here with all the credit and dignity which ought to belong to Sir Walter Elliot .
You talk of being proud ; I am called proud , I know , and I shall not wish to believe myself otherwise ; for our pride , if investigated , would have the same object , I have no doubt , though the kind may seem a little different .
In one point , I am sure , my dear cousin , '' ( he continued , speaking lower , though there was no one else in the room ) '' in one point , I am sure , we must feel alike .
We must feel that every addition to your father 's society , among his equals or superiors , may be of use in diverting his thoughts from those who are beneath him . ''
He looked , as he spoke , to the seat which Mrs Clay had been lately occupying : a sufficient explanation of what he particularly meant ; and though Anne could not believe in their having the same sort of pride , she was pleased with him for not liking Mrs Clay ; and her conscience admitted that his wishing to promote her father 's getting great acquaintance was more than excusable in the view of defeating her .
Chapter 17 While Sir Walter and Elizabeth were assiduously pushing their good fortune in Laura Place , Anne was renewing an acquaintance of a very different description .
She had called on her former governess , and had heard from her of there being an old school-fellow in Bath , who had the two strong claims on her attention of past kindness and present suffering .
Miss Hamilton , now Mrs Smith , had shewn her kindness in one of those periods of her life when it had been most valuable .
Anne had gone unhappy to school , grieving for the loss of a mother whom she had dearly loved , feeling her separation from home , and suffering as a girl of fourteen , of strong sensibility and not high spirits , must suffer at such a time ; and Miss Hamilton , three years older than herself , but still from the want of near relations and a settled home , remaining another year at school , had been useful and good to her in a way which had considerably lessened her misery , and could never be remembered with indifference .
Miss Hamilton had left school , had married not long afterwards , was said to have married a man of fortune , and this was all that Anne had known of her , till now that their governess 's account brought her situation forward in a more decided but very different form .
She was a widow and poor .
Her husband had been extravagant ; and at his death , about two years before , had left his affairs dreadfully involved .
She had had difficulties of every sort to contend with , and in addition to these distresses had been afflicted with a severe rheumatic fever , which , finally settling in her legs , had made her for the present a cripple .
She had come to Bath on that account , and was now in lodgings near the hot baths , living in a very humble way , unable even to afford herself the comfort of a servant , and of course almost excluded from society .
Their mutual friend answered for the satisfaction which a visit from Miss Elliot would give Mrs Smith , and Anne therefore lost no time in going .
She mentioned nothing of what she had heard , or what she intended , at home .
It would excite no proper interest there .
She only consulted Lady Russell , who entered thoroughly into her sentiments , and was most happy to convey her as near to Mrs Smith 's lodgings in Westgate Buildings , as Anne chose to be taken .
The visit was paid , their acquaintance re-established , their interest in each other more than re-kindled .
The first ten minutes had its awkwardness and its emotion .
Twelve years were gone since they had parted , and each presented a somewhat different person from what the other had imagined .
Twelve years had changed Anne from the blooming , silent , unformed girl of fifteen , to the elegant little woman of seven-and-twenty , with every beauty except bloom , and with manners as consciously right as they were invariably gentle ; and twelve years had transformed the fine-looking , well-grown Miss Hamilton , in all the glow of health and confidence of superiority , into a poor , infirm , helpless widow , receiving the visit of her former protegee as a favour ; but all that was uncomfortable in the meeting had soon passed away , and left only the interesting charm of remembering former partialities and talking over old times .
Anne found in Mrs Smith the good sense and agreeable manners which she had almost ventured to depend on , and a disposition to converse and be cheerful beyond her expectation .
Neither the dissipations of the past -- and she had lived very much in the world -- nor the restrictions of the present , neither sickness nor sorrow seemed to have closed her heart or ruined her spirits .
In the course of a second visit she talked with great openness , and Anne 's astonishment increased .
She could scarcely imagine a more cheerless situation in itself than Mrs Smith 's .
She had been very fond of her husband : she had buried him .
She had been used to affluence : it was gone .
She had no child to connect her with life and happiness again , no relations to assist in the arrangement of perplexed affairs , no health to make all the rest supportable .
Her accommodations were limited to a noisy parlour , and a dark bedroom behind , with no possibility of moving from one to the other without assistance , which there was only one servant in the house to afford , and she never quitted the house but to be conveyed into the warm bath .
Yet , in spite of all this , Anne had reason to believe that she had moments only of languor and depression , to hours of occupation and enjoyment .
How could it be ?
She watched , observed , reflected , and finally determined that this was not a case of fortitude or of resignation only .
A submissive spirit might be patient , a strong understanding would supply resolution , but here was something more ; here was that elasticity of mind , that disposition to be comforted , that power of turning readily from evil to good , and of finding employment which carried her out of herself , which was from nature alone .
It was the choicest gift of Heaven ; and Anne viewed her friend as one of those instances in which , by a merciful appointment , it seems designed to counterbalance almost every other want .
There had been a time , Mrs Smith told her , when her spirits had nearly failed .
She could not call herself an invalid now , compared with her state on first reaching Bath .
Then she had , indeed , been a pitiable object ; for she had caught cold on the journey , and had hardly taken possession of her lodgings before she was again confined to her bed and suffering under severe and constant pain ; and all this among strangers , with the absolute necessity of having a regular nurse , and finances at that moment particularly unfit to meet any extraordinary expense .
She had weathered it , however , and could truly say that it had done her good .
It had increased her comforts by making her feel herself to be in good hands .
She had seen too much of the world , to expect sudden or disinterested attachment anywhere , but her illness had proved to her that her landlady had a character to preserve , and would not use her ill ; and she had been particularly fortunate in her nurse , as a sister of her landlady , a nurse by profession , and who had always a home in that house when unemployed , chanced to be at liberty just in time to attend her .
`` And she , '' said Mrs Smith , `` besides nursing me most admirably , has really proved an invaluable acquaintance .
As soon as I could use my hands she taught me to knit , which has been a great amusement ; and she put me in the way of making these little thread-cases , pin-cushions and card-racks , which you always find me so busy about , and which supply me with the means of doing a little good to one or two very poor families in this neighbourhood .
She had a large acquaintance , of course professionally , among those who can afford to buy , and she disposes of my merchandise .
She always takes the right time for applying .
Everybody 's heart is open , you know , when they have recently escaped from severe pain , or are recovering the blessing of health , and Nurse Rooke thoroughly understands when to speak .
She is a shrewd , intelligent , sensible woman .
Hers is a line for seeing human nature ; and she has a fund of good sense and observation , which , as a companion , make her infinitely superior to thousands of those who having only received ` the best education in the world , ' know nothing worth attending to .
Call it gossip , if you will , but when Nurse Rooke has half an hour's leisure to bestow on me , she is sure to have something to relate that is entertaining and profitable : something that makes one know one 's species better .
One likes to hear what is going on , to be au fait as to the newest modes of being trifling and silly .
To me , who live so much alone , her conversation , I assure you , is a treat . ''
Anne , far from wishing to cavil at the pleasure , replied , '' I can easily believe it .
Women of that class have great opportunities , and if they are intelligent may be well worth listening to .
Such varieties of human nature as they are in the habit of witnessing !
And it is not merely in its follies , that they are well read ; for they see it occasionally under every circumstance that can be most interesting or affecting .
What instances must pass before them of ardent , disinterested , self-denying attachment , of heroism , fortitude , patience , resignation : of all the conflicts and all the sacrifices that ennoble us most .
A sick chamber may often furnish the worth of volumes . ''
`` Yes , '' said Mrs Smith more doubtingly , `` sometimes it may , though I fear its lessons are not often in the elevated style you describe .
Here and there , human nature may be great in times of trial ; but generally speaking , it is its weakness and not its strength that appears in a sick chamber : it is selfishness and impatience rather than generosity and fortitude , that one hears of .
There is so little real friendship in the world !
and unfortunately '' ( speaking low and tremulously ) `` there are so many who forget to think seriously till it is almost too late . ''
Anne saw the misery of such feelings .
The husband had not been what he ought , and the wife had been led among that part of mankind which made her think worse of the world than she hoped it deserved .
It was but a passing emotion however with Mrs Smith ; she shook it off , and soon added in a different tone -- '' I do not suppose the situation my friend Mrs Rooke is in at present , will furnish much either to interest or edify me .
She is only nursing Mrs Wallis of Marlborough Buildings ; a mere pretty , silly , expensive , fashionable woman , I believe ; and of course will have nothing to report but of lace and finery .
I mean to make my profit of Mrs Wallis , however .
She has plenty of money , and I intend she shall buy all the high-priced things I have in hand now . ''
Anne had called several times on her friend , before the existence of such a person was known in Camden Place .
At last , it became necessary to speak of her .
Sir Walter , Elizabeth and Mrs Clay , returned one morning from Laura Place , with a sudden invitation from Lady Dalrymple for the same evening , and Anne was already engaged , to spend that evening in Westgate Buildings .
She was not sorry for the excuse .
They were only asked , she was sure , because Lady Dalrymple being kept at home by a bad cold , was glad to make use of the relationship which had been so pressed on her ; and she declined on her own account with great alacrity -- '' She was engaged to spend the evening with an old schoolfellow . ''
They were not much interested in anything relative to Anne ; but still there were questions enough asked , to make it understood what this old schoolfellow was ; and Elizabeth was disdainful , and Sir Walter severe .
`` Westgate Buildings ! ''
said he , `` and who is Miss Anne Elliot to be visiting in Westgate Buildings ?
A Mrs Smith .
A widow Mrs Smith ; and who was her husband ?
One of five thousand Mr Smiths whose names are to be met with everywhere .
And what is her attraction ?
That she is old and sickly .
Upon my word , Miss Anne Elliot , you have the most extraordinary taste !
Everything that revolts other people , low company , paltry rooms , foul air , disgusting associations are inviting to you .
But surely you may put off this old lady till to-morrow : she is not so near her end , I presume , but that she may hope to see another day .
What is her age ?
Forty ? ''
`` No , sir , she is not one-and-thirty ; but I do not think I can put off my engagement , because it is the only evening for some time which will at once suit her and myself .
She goes into the warm bath to-morrow , and for the rest of the week , you know , we are engaged . ''
`` But what does Lady Russell think of this acquaintance ? ''
asked Elizabeth .
`` She sees nothing to blame in it , '' replied Anne ; `` on the contrary , she approves it , and has generally taken me when I have called on Mrs Smith .
`` Westgate Buildings must have been rather surprised by the appearance of a carriage drawn up near its pavement , '' observed Sir Walter .
`` Sir Henry Russell 's widow , indeed , has no honours to distinguish her arms , but still it is a handsome equipage , and no doubt is well known to convey a Miss Elliot .
A widow Mrs Smith lodging in Westgate Buildings !
A poor widow barely able to live , between thirty and forty ; a mere Mrs Smith , an every-day Mrs Smith , of all people and all names in the world , to be the chosen friend of Miss Anne Elliot , and to be preferred by her to her own family connections among the nobility of England and Ireland !
Mrs Smith !
Such a name ! ''
Mrs Clay , who had been present while all this passed , now thought it advisable to leave the room , and Anne could have said much , and did long to say a little in defence of her friend's not very dissimilar claims to theirs , but her sense of personal respect to her father prevented her .
She made no reply .
She left it to himself to recollect , that Mrs Smith was not the only widow in Bath between thirty and forty , with little to live on , and no surname of dignity .
Anne kept her appointment ; the others kept theirs , and of course she heard the next morning that they had had a delightful evening .
She had been the only one of the set absent , for Sir Walter and Elizabeth had not only been quite at her ladyship 's service themselves , but had actually been happy to be employed by her in collecting others , and had been at the trouble of inviting both Lady Russell and Mr Elliot ; and Mr Elliot had made a point of leaving Colonel Wallis early , and Lady Russell had fresh arranged all her evening engagements in order to wait on her .
Anne had the whole history of all that such an evening could supply from Lady Russell .
To her , its greatest interest must be , in having been very much talked of between her friend and Mr Elliot ; in having been wished for , regretted , and at the same time honoured for staying away in such a cause .
Her kind , compassionate visits to this old schoolfellow , sick and reduced , seemed to have quite delighted Mr Elliot .
He thought her a most extraordinary young woman ; in her temper , manners , mind , a model of female excellence .
He could meet even Lady Russell in a discussion of her merits ; and Anne could not be given to understand so much by her friend , could not know herself to be so highly rated by a sensible man , without many of those agreeable sensations which her friend meant to create .
Lady Russell was now perfectly decided in her opinion of Mr Elliot .
She was as much convinced of his meaning to gain Anne in time as of his deserving her , and was beginning to calculate the number of weeks which would free him from all the remaining restraints of widowhood , and leave him at liberty to exert his most open powers of pleasing .
She would not speak to Anne with half the certainty she felt on the subject , she would venture on little more than hints of what might be hereafter , of a possible attachment on his side , of the desirableness of the alliance , supposing such attachment to be real and returned .
Anne heard her , and made no violent exclamations ; she only smiled , blushed , and gently shook her head .
`` I am no match-maker , as you well know , '' said Lady Russell , '' being much too well aware of the uncertainty of all human events and calculations .
I only mean that if Mr Elliot should some time hence pay his addresses to you , and if you should be disposed to accept him , I think there would be every possibility of your being happy together .
A most suitable connection everybody must consider it , but I think it might be a very happy one . ''
`` Mr Elliot is an exceedingly agreeable man , and in many respects I think highly of him , '' said Anne ; `` but we should not suit . ''
Lady Russell let this pass , and only said in rejoinder , `` I own that to be able to regard you as the future mistress of Kellynch , the future Lady Elliot , to look forward and see you occupying your dear mother 's place , succeeding to all her rights , and all her popularity , as well as to all her virtues , would be the highest possible gratification to me .
You are your mother 's self in countenance and disposition ; and if I might be allowed to fancy you such as she was , in situation and name , and home , presiding and blessing in the same spot , and only superior to her in being more highly valued !
My dearest Anne , it would give me more delight than is often felt at my time of life ! ''
Anne was obliged to turn away , to rise , to walk to a distant table , and , leaning there in pretended employment , try to subdue the feelings this picture excited .
For a few moments her imagination and her heart were bewitched .
The idea of becoming what her mother had been ; of having the precious name of `` Lady Elliot '' first revived in herself ; of being restored to Kellynch , calling it her home again , her home for ever , was a charm which she could not immediately resist .
Lady Russell said not another word , willing to leave the matter to its own operation ; and believing that , could Mr Elliot at that moment with propriety have spoken for himself ! -- she believed , in short , what Anne did not believe .
The same image of Mr Elliot speaking for himself brought Anne to composure again .
The charm of Kellynch and of `` Lady Elliot '' all faded away .
She never could accept him .
And it was not only that her feelings were still adverse to any man save one ; her judgement , on a serious consideration of the possibilities of such a case was against Mr Elliot .
Though they had now been acquainted a month , she could not be satisfied that she really knew his character .
That he was a sensible man , an agreeable man , that he talked well , professed good opinions , seemed to judge properly and as a man of principle , this was all clear enough .
He certainly knew what was right , nor could she fix on any one article of moral duty evidently transgressed ; but yet she would have been afraid to answer for his conduct .
She distrusted the past , if not the present .
The names which occasionally dropt of former associates , the allusions to former practices and pursuits , suggested suspicions not favourable of what he had been .
She saw that there had been bad habits ; that Sunday travelling had been a common thing ; that there had been a period of his life ( and probably not a short one ) when he had been , at least , careless in all serious matters ; and , though he might now think very differently , who could answer for the true sentiments of a clever , cautious man , grown old enough to appreciate a fair character ?
How could it ever be ascertained that his mind was truly cleansed ?
Mr Elliot was rational , discreet , polished , but he was not open .
There was never any burst of feeling , any warmth of indignation or delight , at the evil or good of others .
This , to Anne , was a decided imperfection .
Her early impressions were incurable .
She prized the frank , the open-hearted , the eager character beyond all others .
Warmth and enthusiasm did captivate her still .
She felt that she could so much more depend upon the sincerity of those who sometimes looked or said a careless or a hasty thing , than of those whose presence of mind never varied , whose tongue never slipped .
Mr Elliot was too generally agreeable .
Various as were the tempers in her father 's house , he pleased them all .
He endured too well , stood too well with every body .
He had spoken to her with some degree of openness of Mrs Clay ; had appeared completely to see what Mrs Clay was about , and to hold her in contempt ; and yet Mrs Clay found him as agreeable as any body .
Lady Russell saw either less or more than her young friend , for she saw nothing to excite distrust .
She could not imagine a man more exactly what he ought to be than Mr Elliot ; nor did she ever enjoy a sweeter feeling than the hope of seeing him receive the hand of her beloved Anne in Kellynch church , in the course of the following autumn .
Chapter 18 It was the beginning of February ; and Anne , having been a month in Bath , was growing very eager for news from Uppercross and Lyme .
She wanted to hear much more than Mary had communicated .
It was three weeks since she had heard at all .
She only knew that Henrietta was at home again ; and that Louisa , though considered to be recovering fast , was still in Lyme ; and she was thinking of them all very intently one evening , when a thicker letter than usual from Mary was delivered to her ; and , to quicken the pleasure and surprise , with Admiral and Mrs Croft 's compliments .
The Crofts must be in Bath !
A circumstance to interest her .
They were people whom her heart turned to very naturally .
`` What is this ? ''
cried Sir Walter .
`` The Crofts have arrived in Bath ?
The Crofts who rent Kellynch ?
What have they brought you ? ''
`` A letter from Uppercross Cottage , Sir . ''
`` Oh !
those letters are convenient passports .
They secure an introduction .
I should have visited Admiral Croft , however , at any rate .
I know what is due to my tenant . ''
Anne could listen no longer ; she could not even have told how the poor Admiral 's complexion escaped ; her letter engrossed her .
It had been begun several days back .
`` February 1st .
`` My dear Anne , -- I make no apology for my silence , because I know how little people think of letters in such a place as Bath .
You must be a great deal too happy to care for Uppercross , which , as you well know , affords little to write about .
We have had a very dull Christmas ; Mr and Mrs Musgrove have not had one dinner party all the holidays .
I do not reckon the Hayters as anybody .
The holidays , however , are over at last : I believe no children ever had such long ones .
I am sure I had not .
The house was cleared yesterday , except of the little Harvilles ; but you will be surprised to hear they have never gone home .
Mrs Harville must be an odd mother to part with them so long .
I do not understand it .
They are not at all nice children , in my opinion ; but Mrs Musgrove seems to like them quite as well , if not better , than her grandchildren .
What dreadful weather we have had !
It may not be felt in Bath , with your nice pavements ; but in the country it is of some consequence .
I have not had a creature call on me since the second week in January , except Charles Hayter , who had been calling much oftener than was welcome .
Between ourselves , I think it a great pity Henrietta did not remain at Lyme as long as Louisa ; it would have kept her a little out of his way .
The carriage is gone to-day , to bring Louisa and the Harvilles to-morrow .
We are not asked to dine with them , however , till the day after , Mrs Musgrove is so afraid of her being fatigued by the journey , which is not very likely , considering the care that will be taken of her ; and it would be much more convenient to me to dine there to-morrow .
I am glad you find Mr Elliot so agreeable , and wish I could be acquainted with him too ; but I have my usual luck : I am always out of the way when any thing desirable is going on ; always the last of my family to be noticed .
What an immense time Mrs Clay has been staying with Elizabeth !
Does she never mean to go away ?
But perhaps if she were to leave the room vacant , we might not be invited .
Let me know what you think of this .
I do not expect my children to be asked , you know .
I can leave them at the Great House very well , for a month or six weeks .
I have this moment heard that the Crofts are going to Bath almost immediately ; they think the Admiral gouty .
Charles heard it quite by chance ; they have not had the civility to give me any notice , or of offering to take anything .
I do not think they improve at all as neighbours .
We see nothing of them , and this is really an instance of gross inattention .
Charles joins me in love , and everything proper .
Yours affectionately , `` Mary M -- - .
`` I am sorry to say that I am very far from well ; and Jemima has just told me that the butcher says there is a bad sore-throat very much about .
I dare say I shall catch it ; and my sore-throats , you know , are always worse than anybody 's . ''
So ended the first part , which had been afterwards put into an envelope , containing nearly as much more .
`` I kept my letter open , that I might send you word how Louisa bore her journey , and now I am extremely glad I did , having a great deal to add .
In the first place , I had a note from Mrs Croft yesterday , offering to convey anything to you ; a very kind , friendly note indeed , addressed to me , just as it ought ; I shall therefore be able to make my letter as long as I like .
The Admiral does not seem very ill , and I sincerely hope Bath will do him all the good he wants .
I shall be truly glad to have them back again .
Our neighbourhood can not spare such a pleasant family .
But now for Louisa .
I have something to communicate that will astonish you not a little .
She and the Harvilles came on Tuesday very safely , and in the evening we went to ask her how she did , when we were rather surprised not to find Captain Benwick of the party , for he had been invited as well as the Harvilles ; and what do you think was the reason ?
Neither more nor less than his being in love with Louisa , and not choosing to venture to Uppercross till he had had an answer from Mr Musgrove ; for it was all settled between him and her before she came away , and he had written to her father by Captain Harville .
True , upon my honour !
Are not you astonished ?
I shall be surprised at least if you ever received a hint of it , for I never did .
Mrs Musgrove protests solemnly that she knew nothing of the matter .
We are all very well pleased , however , for though it is not equal to her marrying Captain Wentworth , it is infinitely better than Charles Hayter ; and Mr Musgrove has written his consent , and Captain Benwick is expected to-day .
Mrs Harville says her husband feels a good deal on his poor sister 's account ; but , however , Louisa is a great favourite with both .
Indeed , Mrs Harville and I quite agree that we love her the better for having nursed her .
Charles wonders what Captain Wentworth will say ; but if you remember , I never thought him attached to Louisa ; I never could see anything of it .
And this is the end , you see , of Captain Benwick 's being supposed to be an admirer of yours .
How Charles could take such a thing into his head was always incomprehensible to me .
I hope he will be more agreeable now .
Certainly not a great match for Louisa Musgrove , but a million times better than marrying among the Hayters . ''
Mary need not have feared her sister 's being in any degree prepared for the news .
She had never in her life been more astonished .
Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove !
It was almost too wonderful for belief , and it was with the greatest effort that she could remain in the room , preserve an air of calmness , and answer the common questions of the moment .
Happily for her , they were not many .
Sir Walter wanted to know whether the Crofts travelled with four horses , and whether they were likely to be situated in such a part of Bath as it might suit Miss Elliot and himself to visit in ; but had little curiosity beyond .
`` How is Mary ? ''
said Elizabeth ; and without waiting for an answer , '' And pray what brings the Crofts to Bath ? ''
`` They come on the Admiral 's account .
He is thought to be gouty . ''
`` Gout and decrepitude ! ''
said Sir Walter .
`` Poor old gentleman . ''
`` Have they any acquaintance here ? ''
asked Elizabeth .
`` I do not know ; but I can hardly suppose that , at Admiral Croft's time of life , and in his profession , he should not have many acquaintance in such a place as this . ''
`` I suspect , '' said Sir Walter coolly , `` that Admiral Croft will be best known in Bath as the renter of Kellynch Hall .
Elizabeth , may we venture to present him and his wife in Laura Place ? ''
`` Oh , no !
I think not .
Situated as we are with Lady Dalrymple , cousins , we ought to be very careful not to embarrass her with acquaintance she might not approve .
If we were not related , it would not signify ; but as cousins , she would feel scrupulous as to any proposal of ours .
We had better leave the Crofts to find their own level .
There are several odd-looking men walking about here , who , I am told , are sailors .
The Crofts will associate with them . ''
This was Sir Walter and Elizabeth 's share of interest in the letter ; when Mrs Clay had paid her tribute of more decent attention , in an enquiry after Mrs Charles Musgrove , and her fine little boys , Anne was at liberty .
In her own room , she tried to comprehend it .
Well might Charles wonder how Captain Wentworth would feel !
Perhaps he had quitted the field , had given Louisa up , had ceased to love , had found he did not love her .
She could not endure the idea of treachery or levity , or anything akin to ill usage between him and his friend .
She could not endure that such a friendship as theirs should be severed unfairly .
Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove !
The high-spirited , joyous-talking Louisa Musgrove , and the dejected , thinking , feeling , reading , Captain Benwick , seemed each of them everything that would not suit the other .
Their minds most dissimilar !
Where could have been the attraction ?
The answer soon presented itself .
It had been in situation .
They had been thrown together several weeks ; they had been living in the same small family party : since Henrietta's coming away , they must have been depending almost entirely on each other , and Louisa , just recovering from illness , had been in an interesting state , and Captain Benwick was not inconsolable .
That was a point which Anne had not been able to avoid suspecting before ; and instead of drawing the same conclusion as Mary , from the present course of events , they served only to confirm the idea of his having felt some dawning of tenderness toward herself .
She did not mean , however , to derive much more from it to gratify her vanity , than Mary might have allowed .
She was persuaded that any tolerably pleasing young woman who had listened and seemed to feel for him would have received the same compliment .
He had an affectionate heart .
He must love somebody .
She saw no reason against their being happy .
Louisa had fine naval fervour to begin with , and they would soon grow more alike .
He would gain cheerfulness , and she would learn to be an enthusiast for Scott and Lord Byron ; nay , that was probably learnt already ; of course they had fallen in love over poetry .
The idea of Louisa Musgrove turned into a person of literary taste , and sentimental reflection was amusing , but she had no doubt of its being so .
The day at Lyme , the fall from the Cobb , might influence her health , her nerves , her courage , her character to the end of her life , as thoroughly as it appeared to have influenced her fate .
The conclusion of the whole was , that if the woman who had been sensible of Captain Wentworth 's merits could be allowed to prefer another man , there was nothing in the engagement to excite lasting wonder ; and if Captain Wentworth lost no friend by it , certainly nothing to be regretted .
No , it was not regret which made Anne 's heart beat in spite of herself , and brought the colour into her cheeks when she thought of Captain Wentworth unshackled and free .
She had some feelings which she was ashamed to investigate .
They were too much like joy , senseless joy !
She longed to see the Crofts ; but when the meeting took place , it was evident that no rumour of the news had yet reached them .
The visit of ceremony was paid and returned ; and Louisa Musgrove was mentioned , and Captain Benwick , too , without even half a smile .
The Crofts had placed themselves in lodgings in Gay Street , perfectly to Sir Walter 's satisfaction .
He was not at all ashamed of the acquaintance , and did , in fact , think and talk a great deal more about the Admiral , than the Admiral ever thought or talked about him .
The Crofts knew quite as many people in Bath as they wished for , and considered their intercourse with the Elliots as a mere matter of form , and not in the least likely to afford them any pleasure .
They brought with them their country habit of being almost always together .
He was ordered to walk to keep off the gout , and Mrs Croft seemed to go shares with him in everything , and to walk for her life to do him good .
Anne saw them wherever she went .
Lady Russell took her out in her carriage almost every morning , and she never failed to think of them , and never failed to see them .
Knowing their feelings as she did , it was a most attractive picture of happiness to her .
She always watched them as long as she could , delighted to fancy she understood what they might be talking of , as they walked along in happy independence , or equally delighted to see the Admiral 's hearty shake of the hand when he encountered an old friend , and observe their eagerness of conversation when occasionally forming into a little knot of the navy , Mrs Croft looking as intelligent and keen as any of the officers around her .
Anne was too much engaged with Lady Russell to be often walking herself ; but it so happened that one morning , about a week or ten days after the Croft 's arrival , it suited her best to leave her friend , or her friend 's carriage , in the lower part of the town , and return alone to Camden Place , and in walking up Milsom Street she had the good fortune to meet with the Admiral .
He was standing by himself at a printshop window , with his hands behind him , in earnest contemplation of some print , and she not only might have passed him unseen , but was obliged to touch as well as address him before she could catch his notice .
When he did perceive and acknowledge her , however , it was done with all his usual frankness and good humour .
`` Ha !
is it you ?
Thank you , thank you .
This is treating me like a friend .
Here I am , you see , staring at a picture .
I can never get by this shop without stopping .
But what a thing here is , by way of a boat !
Do look at it .
Did you ever see the like ?
What queer fellows your fine painters must be , to think that anybody would venture their lives in such a shapeless old cockleshell as that ?
And yet here are two gentlemen stuck up in it mightily at their ease , and looking about them at the rocks and mountains , as if they were not to be upset the next moment , which they certainly must be .
I wonder where that boat was built ! ''
( laughing heartily ) ; `` I would not venture over a horsepond in it .
Well , '' ( turning away ) , `` now , where are you bound ?
Can I go anywhere for you , or with you ?
Can I be of any use ? ''
`` None , I thank you , unless you will give me the pleasure of your company the little way our road lies together .
I am going home . ''
`` That I will , with all my heart , and farther , too .
Yes , yes we will have a snug walk together , and I have something to tell you as we go along .
There , take my arm ; that 's right ; I do not feel comfortable if I have not a woman there .
Lord !
what a boat it is ! ''
taking a last look at the picture , as they began to be in motion .
`` Did you say that you had something to tell me , sir ? ''
`` Yes , I have , presently .
But here comes a friend , Captain Brigden ; I shall only say , ` How d 'ye do ? '
as we pass , however .
I shall not stop .
` How d 'ye do ? '
Brigden stares to see anybody with me but my wife .
She , poor soul , is tied by the leg .
She has a blister on one of her heels , as large as a three-shilling piece .
If you look across the street , you will see Admiral Brand coming down and his brother .
Shabby fellows , both of them !
I am glad they are not on this side of the way .
Sophy can not bear them .
They played me a pitiful trick once : got away with some of my best men .
I will tell you the whole story another time .
There comes old Sir Archibald Drew and his grandson .
Look , he sees us ; he kisses his hand to you ; he takes you for my wife .
Ah !
the peace has come too soon for that younker .
Poor old Sir Archibald !
How do you like Bath , Miss Elliot ?
It suits us very well .
We are always meeting with some old friend or other ; the streets full of them every morning ; sure to have plenty of chat ; and then we get away from them all , and shut ourselves in our lodgings , and draw in our chairs , and are snug as if we were at Kellynch , ay , or as we used to be even at North Yarmouth and Deal .
We do not like our lodgings here the worse , I can tell you , for putting us in mind of those we first had at North Yarmouth .
The wind blows through one of the cupboards just in the same way . ''
When they were got a little farther , Anne ventured to press again for what he had to communicate .
She hoped when clear of Milsom Street to have her curiosity gratified ; but she was still obliged to wait , for the Admiral had made up his mind not to begin till they had gained the greater space and quiet of Belmont ; and as she was not really Mrs Croft , she must let him have his own way .
As soon as they were fairly ascending Belmont , he began -- '' Well , now you shall hear something that will surprise you .
But first of all , you must tell me the name of the young lady I am going to talk about .
That young lady , you know , that we have all been so concerned for .
The Miss Musgrove , that all this has been happening to .
Her Christian name : I always forget her Christian name . ''
Anne had been ashamed to appear to comprehend so soon as she really did ; but now she could safely suggest the name of `` Louisa . ''
`` Ay , ay , Miss Louisa Musgrove , that is the name .
I wish young ladies had not such a number of fine Christian names .
I should never be out if they were all Sophys , or something of that sort .
Well , this Miss Louisa , we all thought , you know , was to marry Frederick .
He was courting her week after week .
The only wonder was , what they could be waiting for , till the business at Lyme came ; then , indeed , it was clear enough that they must wait till her brain was set to right .
But even then there was something odd in their way of going on .
Instead of staying at Lyme , he went off to Plymouth , and then he went off to see Edward .
When we came back from Minehead he was gone down to Edward 's , and there he has been ever since .
We have seen nothing of him since November .
Even Sophy could not understand it .
But now , the matter has take the strangest turn of all ; for this young lady , the same Miss Musgrove , instead of being to marry Frederick , is to marry James Benwick .
You know James Benwick . ''
`` A little .
I am a little acquainted with Captain Benwick . ''
`` Well , she is to marry him .
Nay , most likely they are married already , for I do not know what they should wait for . ''
`` I thought Captain Benwick a very pleasing young man , '' said Anne , '' and I understand that he bears an excellent character . ''
`` Oh !
yes , yes , there is not a word to be said against James Benwick .
He is only a commander , it is true , made last summer , and these are bad times for getting on , but he has not another fault that I know of .
An excellent , good-hearted fellow , I assure you ; a very active , zealous officer too , which is more than you would think for , perhaps , for that soft sort of manner does not do him justice . ''
`` Indeed you are mistaken there , sir ; I should never augur want of spirit from Captain Benwick 's manners .
I thought them particularly pleasing , and I will answer for it , they would generally please . ''
`` Well , well , ladies are the best judges ; but James Benwick is rather too piano for me ; and though very likely it is all our partiality , Sophy and I can not help thinking Frederick 's manners better than his .
There is something about Frederick more to our taste . ''
Anne was caught .
She had only meant to oppose the too common idea of spirit and gentleness being incompatible with each other , not at all to represent Captain Benwick 's manners as the very best that could possibly be ; and , after a little hesitation , she was beginning to say , `` I was not entering into any comparison of the two friends , '' but the Admiral interrupted her with -- '' And the thing is certainly true .
It is not a mere bit of gossip .
We have it from Frederick himself .
His sister had a letter from him yesterday , in which he tells us of it , and he had just had it in a letter from Harville , written upon the spot , from Uppercross .
I fancy they are all at Uppercross . ''
This was an opportunity which Anne could not resist ; she said , therefore , '' I hope , Admiral , I hope there is nothing in the style of Captain Wentworth 's letter to make you and Mrs Croft particularly uneasy .
It did seem , last autumn , as if there were an attachment between him and Louisa Musgrove ; but I hope it may be understood to have worn out on each side equally , and without violence .
I hope his letter does not breathe the spirit of an ill-used man . ''
`` Not at all , not at all ; there is not an oath or a murmur from beginning to end . ''
Anne looked down to hide her smile .
`` No , no ; Frederick is not a man to whine and complain ; he has too much spirit for that .
If the girl likes another man better , it is very fit she should have him . ''
`` Certainly .
But what I mean is , that I hope there is nothing in Captain Wentworth 's manner of writing to make you suppose he thinks himself ill-used by his friend , which might appear , you know , without its being absolutely said .
I should be very sorry that such a friendship as has subsisted between him and Captain Benwick should be destroyed , or even wounded , by a circumstance of this sort . ''
`` Yes , yes , I understand you .
But there is nothing at all of that nature in the letter .
He does not give the least fling at Benwick ; does not so much as say , ` I wonder at it , I have a reason of my own for wondering at it . '
No , you would not guess , from his way of writing , that he had ever thought of this Miss ( what 's her name ? )
for himself .
He very handsomely hopes they will be happy together ; and there is nothing very unforgiving in that , I think . ''
Anne did not receive the perfect conviction which the Admiral meant to convey , but it would have been useless to press the enquiry farther .
She therefore satisfied herself with common-place remarks or quiet attention , and the Admiral had it all his own way .
`` Poor Frederick ! ''
said he at last .
`` Now he must begin all over again with somebody else .
I think we must get him to Bath .
Sophy must write , and beg him to come to Bath .
Here are pretty girls enough , I am sure .
It would be of no use to go to Uppercross again , for that other Miss Musgrove , I find , is bespoke by her cousin , the young parson .
Do not you think , Miss Elliot , we had better try to get him to Bath ? ''
Chapter 19 While Admiral Croft was taking this walk with Anne , and expressing his wish of getting Captain Wentworth to Bath , Captain Wentworth was already on his way thither .
Before Mrs Croft had written , he was arrived , and the very next time Anne walked out , she saw him .
Mr Elliot was attending his two cousins and Mrs Clay .
They were in Milsom Street .
It began to rain , not much , but enough to make shelter desirable for women , and quite enough to make it very desirable for Miss Elliot to have the advantage of being conveyed home in Lady Dalrymple 's carriage , which was seen waiting at a little distance ; she , Anne , and Mrs Clay , therefore , turned into Molland 's , while Mr Elliot stepped to Lady Dalrymple , to request her assistance .
He soon joined them again , successful , of course ; Lady Dalrymple would be most happy to take them home , and would call for them in a few minutes .
Her ladyship 's carriage was a barouche , and did not hold more than four with any comfort .
Miss Carteret was with her mother ; consequently it was not reasonable to expect accommodation for all the three Camden Place ladies .
There could be no doubt as to Miss Elliot .
Whoever suffered inconvenience , she must suffer none , but it occupied a little time to settle the point of civility between the other two .
The rain was a mere trifle , and Anne was most sincere in preferring a walk with Mr Elliot .
But the rain was also a mere trifle to Mrs Clay ; she would hardly allow it even to drop at all , and her boots were so thick !
much thicker than Miss Anne 's ; and , in short , her civility rendered her quite as anxious to be left to walk with Mr Elliot as Anne could be , and it was discussed between them with a generosity so polite and so determined , that the others were obliged to settle it for them ; Miss Elliot maintaining that Mrs Clay had a little cold already , and Mr Elliot deciding on appeal , that his cousin Anne 's boots were rather the thickest .
It was fixed accordingly , that Mrs Clay should be of the party in the carriage ; and they had just reached this point , when Anne , as she sat near the window , descried , most decidedly and distinctly , Captain Wentworth walking down the street .
Her start was perceptible only to herself ; but she instantly felt that she was the greatest simpleton in the world , the most unaccountable and absurd !
For a few minutes she saw nothing before her ; it was all confusion .
She was lost , and when she had scolded back her senses , she found the others still waiting for the carriage , and Mr Elliot ( always obliging ) just setting off for Union Street on a commission of Mrs Clay 's .
She now felt a great inclination to go to the outer door ; she wanted to see if it rained .
Why was she to suspect herself of another motive ?
Captain Wentworth must be out of sight .
She left her seat , she would go ; one half of her should not be always so much wiser than the other half , or always suspecting the other of being worse than it was .
She would see if it rained .
She was sent back , however , in a moment by the entrance of Captain Wentworth himself , among a party of gentlemen and ladies , evidently his acquaintance , and whom he must have joined a little below Milsom Street .
He was more obviously struck and confused by the sight of her than she had ever observed before ; he looked quite red .
For the first time , since their renewed acquaintance , she felt that she was betraying the least sensibility of the two .
She had the advantage of him in the preparation of the last few moments .
All the overpowering , blinding , bewildering , first effects of strong surprise were over with her .
Still , however , she had enough to feel !
It was agitation , pain , pleasure , a something between delight and misery .
He spoke to her , and then turned away .
The character of his manner was embarrassment .
She could not have called it either cold or friendly , or anything so certainly as embarrassed .
After a short interval , however , he came towards her , and spoke again .
Mutual enquiries on common subjects passed : neither of them , probably , much the wiser for what they heard , and Anne continuing fully sensible of his being less at ease than formerly .
They had by dint of being so very much together , got to speak to each other with a considerable portion of apparent indifference and calmness ; but he could not do it now .
Time had changed him , or Louisa had changed him .
There was consciousness of some sort or other .
He looked very well , not as if he had been suffering in health or spirits , and he talked of Uppercross , of the Musgroves , nay , even of Louisa , and had even a momentary look of his own arch significance as he named her ; but yet it was Captain Wentworth not comfortable , not easy , not able to feign that he was .
It did not surprise , but it grieved Anne to observe that Elizabeth would not know him .
She saw that he saw Elizabeth , that Elizabeth saw him , that there was complete internal recognition on each side ; she was convinced that he was ready to be acknowledged as an acquaintance , expecting it , and she had the pain of seeing her sister turn away with unalterable coldness .
Lady Dalrymple 's carriage , for which Miss Elliot was growing very impatient , now drew up ; the servant came in to announce it .
It was beginning to rain again , and altogether there was a delay , and a bustle , and a talking , which must make all the little crowd in the shop understand that Lady Dalrymple was calling to convey Miss Elliot .
At last Miss Elliot and her friend , unattended but by the servant , ( for there was no cousin returned ) , were walking off ; and Captain Wentworth , watching them , turned again to Anne , and by manner , rather than words , was offering his services to her .
`` I am much obliged to you , '' was her answer , `` but I am not going with them .
The carriage would not accommodate so many .
I walk : I prefer walking . ''
`` But it rains . ''
`` Oh !
very little , Nothing that I regard . ''
After a moment 's pause he said : `` Though I came only yesterday , I have equipped myself properly for Bath already , you see , '' ( pointing to a new umbrella ) ; `` I wish you would make use of it , if you are determined to walk ; though I think it would be more prudent to let me get you a chair . ''
She was very much obliged to him , but declined it all , repeating her conviction , that the rain would come to nothing at present , and adding , `` I am only waiting for Mr Elliot .
He will be here in a moment , I am sure . ''
She had hardly spoken the words when Mr Elliot walked in .
Captain Wentworth recollected him perfectly .
There was no difference between him and the man who had stood on the steps at Lyme , admiring Anne as she passed , except in the air and look and manner of the privileged relation and friend .
He came in with eagerness , appeared to see and think only of her , apologised for his stay , was grieved to have kept her waiting , and anxious to get her away without further loss of time and before the rain increased ; and in another moment they walked off together , her arm under his , a gentle and embarrassed glance , and a `` Good morning to you ! ''
being all that she had time for , as she passed away .
As soon as they were out of sight , the ladies of Captain Wentworth 's party began talking of them .
`` Mr Elliot does not dislike his cousin , I fancy ? ''
`` Oh !
no , that is clear enough .
One can guess what will happen there .
He is always with them ; half lives in the family , I believe .
What a very good-looking man ! ''
`` Yes , and Miss Atkinson , who dined with him once at the Wallises , says he is the most agreeable man she ever was in company with . ''
`` She is pretty , I think ; Anne Elliot ; very pretty , when one comes to look at her .
It is not the fashion to say so , but I confess I admire her more than her sister . ''
`` Oh !
so do I . ''
`` And so do I . No comparison .
But the men are all wild after Miss Elliot .
Anne is too delicate for them . ''
Anne would have been particularly obliged to her cousin , if he would have walked by her side all the way to Camden Place , without saying a word .
She had never found it so difficult to listen to him , though nothing could exceed his solicitude and care , and though his subjects were principally such as were wont to be always interesting : praise , warm , just , and discriminating , of Lady Russell , and insinuations highly rational against Mrs Clay .
But just now she could think only of Captain Wentworth .
She could not understand his present feelings , whether he were really suffering much from disappointment or not ; and till that point were settled , she could not be quite herself .
She hoped to be wise and reasonable in time ; but alas !
alas !
she must confess to herself that she was not wise yet .
Another circumstance very essential for her to know , was how long he meant to be in Bath ; he had not mentioned it , or she could not recollect it .
He might be only passing through .
But it was more probable that he should be come to stay .
In that case , so liable as every body was to meet every body in Bath , Lady Russell would in all likelihood see him somewhere .
Would she recollect him ?
How would it all be ?
She had already been obliged to tell Lady Russell that Louisa Musgrove was to marry Captain Benwick .
It had cost her something to encounter Lady Russell 's surprise ; and now , if she were by any chance to be thrown into company with Captain Wentworth , her imperfect knowledge of the matter might add another shade of prejudice against him .
The following morning Anne was out with her friend , and for the first hour , in an incessant and fearful sort of watch for him in vain ; but at last , in returning down Pulteney Street , she distinguished him on the right hand pavement at such a distance as to have him in view the greater part of the street .
There were many other men about him , many groups walking the same way , but there was no mistaking him .
She looked instinctively at Lady Russell ; but not from any mad idea of her recognising him so soon as she did herself .
No , it was not to be supposed that Lady Russell would perceive him till they were nearly opposite .
She looked at her however , from time to time , anxiously ; and when the moment approached which must point him out , though not daring to look again ( for her own countenance she knew was unfit to be seen ) , she was yet perfectly conscious of Lady Russell 's eyes being turned exactly in the direction for him -- of her being , in short , intently observing him .
She could thoroughly comprehend the sort of fascination he must possess over Lady Russell 's mind , the difficulty it must be for her to withdraw her eyes , the astonishment she must be feeling that eight or nine years should have passed over him , and in foreign climes and in active service too , without robbing him of one personal grace !
At last , Lady Russell drew back her head .
`` Now , how would she speak of him ? ''
`` You will wonder , '' said she , `` what has been fixing my eye so long ; but I was looking after some window-curtains , which Lady Alicia and Mrs Frankland were telling me of last night .
They described the drawing-room window-curtains of one of the houses on this side of the way , and this part of the street , as being the handsomest and best hung of any in Bath , but could not recollect the exact number , and I have been trying to find out which it could be ; but I confess I can see no curtains hereabouts that answer their description . ''
Anne sighed and blushed and smiled , in pity and disdain , either at her friend or herself .
The part which provoked her most , was that in all this waste of foresight and caution , she should have lost the right moment for seeing whether he saw them .
A day or two passed without producing anything .
The theatre or the rooms , where he was most likely to be , were not fashionable enough for the Elliots , whose evening amusements were solely in the elegant stupidity of private parties , in which they were getting more and more engaged ; and Anne , wearied of such a state of stagnation , sick of knowing nothing , and fancying herself stronger because her strength was not tried , was quite impatient for the concert evening .
It was a concert for the benefit of a person patronised by Lady Dalrymple .
Of course they must attend .
It was really expected to be a good one , and Captain Wentworth was very fond of music .
If she could only have a few minutes conversation with him again , she fancied she should be satisfied ; and as to the power of addressing him , she felt all over courage if the opportunity occurred .
Elizabeth had turned from him , Lady Russell overlooked him ; her nerves were strengthened by these circumstances ; she felt that she owed him attention .
She had once partly promised Mrs Smith to spend the evening with her ; but in a short hurried call she excused herself and put it off , with the more decided promise of a longer visit on the morrow .
Mrs Smith gave a most good-humoured acquiescence .
`` By all means , '' said she ; `` only tell me all about it , when you do come .
Who is your party ? ''
Anne named them all .
Mrs Smith made no reply ; but when she was leaving her said , and with an expression half serious , half arch , '' Well , I heartily wish your concert may answer ; and do not fail me to-morrow if you can come ; for I begin to have a foreboding that I may not have many more visits from you . ''
Anne was startled and confused ; but after standing in a moment 's suspense , was obliged , and not sorry to be obliged , to hurry away .
Chapter 20 Sir Walter , his two daughters , and Mrs Clay , were the earliest of all their party at the rooms in the evening ; and as Lady Dalrymple must be waited for , they took their station by one of the fires in the Octagon Room .
But hardly were they so settled , when the door opened again , and Captain Wentworth walked in alone .
Anne was the nearest to him , and making yet a little advance , she instantly spoke .
He was preparing only to bow and pass on , but her gentle `` How do you do ? ''
brought him out of the straight line to stand near her , and make enquiries in return , in spite of the formidable father and sister in the back ground .
Their being in the back ground was a support to Anne ; she knew nothing of their looks , and felt equal to everything which she believed right to be done .
While they were speaking , a whispering between her father and Elizabeth caught her ear .
She could not distinguish , but she must guess the subject ; and on Captain Wentworth 's making a distant bow , she comprehended that her father had judged so well as to give him that simple acknowledgement of acquaintance , and she was just in time by a side glance to see a slight curtsey from Elizabeth herself .
This , though late , and reluctant , and ungracious , was yet better than nothing , and her spirits improved .
After talking , however , of the weather , and Bath , and the concert , their conversation began to flag , and so little was said at last , that she was expecting him to go every moment , but he did not ; he seemed in no hurry to leave her ; and presently with renewed spirit , with a little smile , a little glow , he said -- '' I have hardly seen you since our day at Lyme .
I am afraid you must have suffered from the shock , and the more from its not overpowering you at the time . ''
She assured him that she had not .
`` It was a frightful hour , '' said he , `` a frightful day ! ''
and he passed his hand across his eyes , as if the remembrance were still too painful , but in a moment , half smiling again , added , '' The day has produced some effects however ; has had some consequences which must be considered as the very reverse of frightful .
When you had the presence of mind to suggest that Benwick would be the properest person to fetch a surgeon , you could have little idea of his being eventually one of those most concerned in her recovery . ''
`` Certainly I could have none .
But it appears -- I should hope it would be a very happy match .
There are on both sides good principles and good temper . ''
`` Yes , '' said he , looking not exactly forward ; `` but there , I think , ends the resemblance .
With all my soul I wish them happy , and rejoice over every circumstance in favour of it .
They have no difficulties to contend with at home , no opposition , no caprice , no delays .
The Musgroves are behaving like themselves , most honourably and kindly , only anxious with true parental hearts to promote their daughter 's comfort .
All this is much , very much in favour of their happiness ; more than perhaps -- '' He stopped .
A sudden recollection seemed to occur , and to give him some taste of that emotion which was reddening Anne 's cheeks and fixing her eyes on the ground .
After clearing his throat , however , he proceeded thus -- '' I confess that I do think there is a disparity , too great a disparity , and in a point no less essential than mind .
I regard Louisa Musgrove as a very amiable , sweet-tempered girl , and not deficient in understanding , but Benwick is something more .
He is a clever man , a reading man ; and I confess , that I do consider his attaching himself to her with some surprise .
Had it been the effect of gratitude , had he learnt to love her , because he believed her to be preferring him , it would have been another thing .
But I have no reason to suppose it so .
It seems , on the contrary , to have been a perfectly spontaneous , untaught feeling on his side , and this surprises me .
A man like him , in his situation !
with a heart pierced , wounded , almost broken !
Fanny Harville was a very superior creature , and his attachment to her was indeed attachment .
A man does not recover from such a devotion of the heart to such a woman .
He ought not ; he does not . ''
Either from the consciousness , however , that his friend had recovered , or from other consciousness , he went no farther ; and Anne who , in spite of the agitated voice in which the latter part had been uttered , and in spite of all the various noises of the room , the almost ceaseless slam of the door , and ceaseless buzz of persons walking through , had distinguished every word , was struck , gratified , confused , and beginning to breathe very quick , and feel an hundred things in a moment .
It was impossible for her to enter on such a subject ; and yet , after a pause , feeling the necessity of speaking , and having not the smallest wish for a total change , she only deviated so far as to say -- '' You were a good while at Lyme , I think ? ''
`` About a fortnight .
I could not leave it till Louisa 's doing well was quite ascertained .
I had been too deeply concerned in the mischief to be soon at peace .
It had been my doing , solely mine .
She would not have been obstinate if I had not been weak .
The country round Lyme is very fine .
I walked and rode a great deal ; and the more I saw , the more I found to admire . ''
`` I should very much like to see Lyme again , '' said Anne .
`` Indeed !
I should not have supposed that you could have found anything in Lyme to inspire such a feeling .
The horror and distress you were involved in , the stretch of mind , the wear of spirits !
I should have thought your last impressions of Lyme must have been strong disgust . ''
`` The last hours were certainly very painful , '' replied Anne ; '' but when pain is over , the remembrance of it often becomes a pleasure .
One does not love a place the less for having suffered in it , unless it has been all suffering , nothing but suffering , which was by no means the case at Lyme .
We were only in anxiety and distress during the last two hours , and previously there had been a great deal of enjoyment .
So much novelty and beauty !
I have travelled so little , that every fresh place would be interesting to me ; but there is real beauty at Lyme ; and in short '' ( with a faint blush at some recollections ) , '' altogether my impressions of the place are very agreeable . ''
As she ceased , the entrance door opened again , and the very party appeared for whom they were waiting .
`` Lady Dalrymple , Lady Dalrymple , '' was the rejoicing sound ; and with all the eagerness compatible with anxious elegance , Sir Walter and his two ladies stepped forward to meet her .
Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret , escorted by Mr Elliot and Colonel Wallis , who had happened to arrive nearly at the same instant , advanced into the room .
The others joined them , and it was a group in which Anne found herself also necessarily included .
She was divided from Captain Wentworth .
Their interesting , almost too interesting conversation must be broken up for a time , but slight was the penance compared with the happiness which brought it on !
She had learnt , in the last ten minutes , more of his feelings towards Louisa , more of all his feelings than she dared to think of ; and she gave herself up to the demands of the party , to the needful civilities of the moment , with exquisite , though agitated sensations .
She was in good humour with all .
She had received ideas which disposed her to be courteous and kind to all , and to pity every one , as being less happy than herself .
The delightful emotions were a little subdued , when on stepping back from the group , to be joined again by Captain Wentworth , she saw that he was gone .
She was just in time to see him turn into the Concert Room .
He was gone ; he had disappeared , she felt a moment 's regret .
But `` they should meet again .
He would look for her , he would find her out before the evening were over , and at present , perhaps , it was as well to be asunder .
She was in need of a little interval for recollection . ''
Upon Lady Russell 's appearance soon afterwards , the whole party was collected , and all that remained was to marshal themselves , and proceed into the Concert Room ; and be of all the consequence in their power , draw as many eyes , excite as many whispers , and disturb as many people as they could .
Very , very happy were both Elizabeth and Anne Elliot as they walked in .
Elizabeth arm in arm with Miss Carteret , and looking on the broad back of the dowager Viscountess Dalrymple before her , had nothing to wish for which did not seem within her reach ; and Anne -- but it would be an insult to the nature of Anne 's felicity , to draw any comparison between it and her sister 's ; the origin of one all selfish vanity , of the other all generous attachment .
Anne saw nothing , thought nothing of the brilliancy of the room .
Her happiness was from within .
Her eyes were bright and her cheeks glowed ; but she knew nothing about it .
She was thinking only of the last half hour , and as they passed to their seats , her mind took a hasty range over it .
His choice of subjects , his expressions , and still more his manner and look , had been such as she could see in only one light .
His opinion of Louisa Musgrove 's inferiority , an opinion which he had seemed solicitous to give , his wonder at Captain Benwick , his feelings as to a first , strong attachment ; sentences begun which he could not finish , his half averted eyes and more than half expressive glance , all , all declared that he had a heart returning to her at least ; that anger , resentment , avoidance , were no more ; and that they were succeeded , not merely by friendship and regard , but by the tenderness of the past .
Yes , some share of the tenderness of the past .
She could not contemplate the change as implying less .
He must love her .
These were thoughts , with their attendant visions , which occupied and flurried her too much to leave her any power of observation ; and she passed along the room without having a glimpse of him , without even trying to discern him .
When their places were determined on , and they were all properly arranged , she looked round to see if he should happen to be in the same part of the room , but he was not ; her eye could not reach him ; and the concert being just opening , she must consent for a time to be happy in a humbler way .
The party was divided and disposed of on two contiguous benches : Anne was among those on the foremost , and Mr Elliot had manoeuvred so well , with the assistance of his friend Colonel Wallis , as to have a seat by her .
Miss Elliot , surrounded by her cousins , and the principal object of Colonel Wallis 's gallantry , was quite contented .
Anne 's mind was in a most favourable state for the entertainment of the evening ; it was just occupation enough : she had feelings for the tender , spirits for the gay , attention for the scientific , and patience for the wearisome ; and had never liked a concert better , at least during the first act .
Towards the close of it , in the interval succeeding an Italian song , she explained the words of the song to Mr Elliot .
They had a concert bill between them .
`` This , '' said she , `` is nearly the sense , or rather the meaning of the words , for certainly the sense of an Italian love-song must not be talked of , but it is as nearly the meaning as I can give ; for I do not pretend to understand the language .
I am a very poor Italian scholar . ''
`` Yes , yes , I see you are .
I see you know nothing of the matter .
You have only knowledge enough of the language to translate at sight these inverted , transposed , curtailed Italian lines , into clear , comprehensible , elegant English .
You need not say anything more of your ignorance .
Here is complete proof . ''
`` I will not oppose such kind politeness ; but I should be sorry to be examined by a real proficient . ''
`` I have not had the pleasure of visiting in Camden Place so long , '' replied he , `` without knowing something of Miss Anne Elliot ; and I do regard her as one who is too modest for the world in general to be aware of half her accomplishments , and too highly accomplished for modesty to be natural in any other woman . ''
`` For shame !
for shame !
this is too much flattery .
I forget what we are to have next , '' turning to the bill .
`` Perhaps , '' said Mr Elliot , speaking low , `` I have had a longer acquaintance with your character than you are aware of . ''
`` Indeed !
How so ?
You can have been acquainted with it only since I came to Bath , excepting as you might hear me previously spoken of in my own family . ''
`` I knew you by report long before you came to Bath .
I had heard you described by those who knew you intimately .
I have been acquainted with you by character many years .
Your person , your disposition , accomplishments , manner ; they were all present to me . ''
Mr Elliot was not disappointed in the interest he hoped to raise .
No one can withstand the charm of such a mystery .
To have been described long ago to a recent acquaintance , by nameless people , is irresistible ; and Anne was all curiosity .
She wondered , and questioned him eagerly ; but in vain .
He delighted in being asked , but he would not tell .
`` No , no , some time or other , perhaps , but not now .
He would mention no names now ; but such , he could assure her , had been the fact .
He had many years ago received such a description of Miss Anne Elliot as had inspired him with the highest idea of her merit , and excited the warmest curiosity to know her . ''
Anne could think of no one so likely to have spoken with partiality of her many years ago as the Mr Wentworth of Monkford , Captain Wentworth 's brother .
He might have been in Mr Elliot 's company , but she had not courage to ask the question .
`` The name of Anne Elliot , '' said he , `` has long had an interesting sound to me .
Very long has it possessed a charm over my fancy ; and , if I dared , I would breathe my wishes that the name might never change . ''
Such , she believed , were his words ; but scarcely had she received their sound , than her attention was caught by other sounds immediately behind her , which rendered every thing else trivial .
Her father and Lady Dalrymple were speaking .
`` A well-looking man , '' said Sir Walter , `` a very well-looking man . ''
`` A very fine young man indeed ! ''
said Lady Dalrymple .
`` More air than one often sees in Bath .
Irish , I dare say . ''
`` No , I just know his name .
A bowing acquaintance .
Wentworth ; Captain Wentworth of the navy .
His sister married my tenant in Somersetshire , the Croft , who rents Kellynch . ''
Before Sir Walter had reached this point , Anne 's eyes had caught the right direction , and distinguished Captain Wentworth standing among a cluster of men at a little distance .
As her eyes fell on him , his seemed to be withdrawn from her .
It had that appearance .
It seemed as if she had been one moment too late ; and as long as she dared observe , he did not look again : but the performance was recommencing , and she was forced to seem to restore her attention to the orchestra and look straight forward .
When she could give another glance , he had moved away .
He could not have come nearer to her if he would ; she was so surrounded and shut in : but she would rather have caught his eye .
Mr Elliot 's speech , too , distressed her .
She had no longer any inclination to talk to him .
She wished him not so near her .
The first act was over .
Now she hoped for some beneficial change ; and , after a period of nothing-saying amongst the party , some of them did decide on going in quest of tea .
Anne was one of the few who did not choose to move .
She remained in her seat , and so did Lady Russell ; but she had the pleasure of getting rid of Mr Elliot ; and she did not mean , whatever she might feel on Lady Russell 's account , to shrink from conversation with Captain Wentworth , if he gave her the opportunity .
She was persuaded by Lady Russell 's countenance that she had seen him .
He did not come however .
Anne sometimes fancied she discerned him at a distance , but he never came .
The anxious interval wore away unproductively .
The others returned , the room filled again , benches were reclaimed and repossessed , and another hour of pleasure or of penance was to be sat out , another hour of music was to give delight or the gapes , as real or affected taste for it prevailed .
To Anne , it chiefly wore the prospect of an hour of agitation .
She could not quit that room in peace without seeing Captain Wentworth once more , without the interchange of one friendly look .
In re-settling themselves there were now many changes , the result of which was favourable for her .
Colonel Wallis declined sitting down again , and Mr Elliot was invited by Elizabeth and Miss Carteret , in a manner not to be refused , to sit between them ; and by some other removals , and a little scheming of her own , Anne was enabled to place herself much nearer the end of the bench than she had been before , much more within reach of a passer-by .
She could not do so , without comparing herself with Miss Larolles , the inimitable Miss Larolles ; but still she did it , and not with much happier effect ; though by what seemed prosperity in the shape of an early abdication in her next neighbours , she found herself at the very end of the bench before the concert closed .
Such was her situation , with a vacant space at hand , when Captain Wentworth was again in sight .
She saw him not far off .
He saw her too ; yet he looked grave , and seemed irresolute , and only by very slow degrees came at last near enough to speak to her .
She felt that something must be the matter .
The change was indubitable .
The difference between his present air and what it had been in the Octagon Room was strikingly great .
Why was it ?
She thought of her father , of Lady Russell .
Could there have been any unpleasant glances ?
He began by speaking of the concert gravely , more like the Captain Wentworth of Uppercross ; owned himself disappointed , had expected singing ; and in short , must confess that he should not be sorry when it was over .
Anne replied , and spoke in defence of the performance so well , and yet in allowance for his feelings so pleasantly , that his countenance improved , and he replied again with almost a smile .
They talked for a few minutes more ; the improvement held ; he even looked down towards the bench , as if he saw a place on it well worth occupying ; when at that moment a touch on her shoulder obliged Anne to turn round .
It came from Mr Elliot .
He begged her pardon , but she must be applied to , to explain Italian again .
Miss Carteret was very anxious to have a general idea of what was next to be sung .
Anne could not refuse ; but never had she sacrificed to politeness with a more suffering spirit .
A few minutes , though as few as possible , were inevitably consumed ; and when her own mistress again , when able to turn and look as she had done before , she found herself accosted by Captain Wentworth , in a reserved yet hurried sort of farewell .
`` He must wish her good night ; he was going ; he should get home as fast as he could . ''
`` Is not this song worth staying for ? ''
said Anne , suddenly struck by an idea which made her yet more anxious to be encouraging .
`` No ! ''
he replied impressively , `` there is nothing worth my staying for ; '' and he was gone directly .
Jealousy of Mr Elliot !
It was the only intelligible motive .
Captain Wentworth jealous of her affection !
Could she have believed it a week ago ; three hours ago !
For a moment the gratification was exquisite .
But , alas !
there were very different thoughts to succeed .
How was such jealousy to be quieted ?
How was the truth to reach him ?
How , in all the peculiar disadvantages of their respective situations , would he ever learn of her real sentiments ?
It was misery to think of Mr Elliot 's attentions .
Their evil was incalculable .
Chapter 21 Anne recollected with pleasure the next morning her promise of going to Mrs Smith , meaning that it should engage her from home at the time when Mr Elliot would be most likely to call ; for to avoid Mr Elliot was almost a first object .
She felt a great deal of good-will towards him .
In spite of the mischief of his attentions , she owed him gratitude and regard , perhaps compassion .
She could not help thinking much of the extraordinary circumstances attending their acquaintance , of the right which he seemed to have to interest her , by everything in situation , by his own sentiments , by his early prepossession .
It was altogether very extraordinary ; flattering , but painful .
There was much to regret .
How she might have felt had there been no Captain Wentworth in the case , was not worth enquiry ; for there was a Captain Wentworth ; and be the conclusion of the present suspense good or bad , her affection would be his for ever .
Their union , she believed , could not divide her more from other men , than their final separation .
Prettier musings of high-wrought love and eternal constancy , could never have passed along the streets of Bath , than Anne was sporting with from Camden Place to Westgate Buildings .
It was almost enough to spread purification and perfume all the way .
She was sure of a pleasant reception ; and her friend seemed this morning particularly obliged to her for coming , seemed hardly to have expected her , though it had been an appointment .
An account of the concert was immediately claimed ; and Anne 's recollections of the concert were quite happy enough to animate her features and make her rejoice to talk of it .
All that she could tell she told most gladly , but the all was little for one who had been there , and unsatisfactory for such an enquirer as Mrs Smith , who had already heard , through the short cut of a laundress and a waiter , rather more of the general success and produce of the evening than Anne could relate , and who now asked in vain for several particulars of the company .
Everybody of any consequence or notoriety in Bath was well know by name to Mrs Smith .
`` The little Durands were there , I conclude , '' said she , `` with their mouths open to catch the music , like unfledged sparrows ready to be fed .
They never miss a concert . ''
`` Yes ; I did not see them myself , but I heard Mr Elliot say they were in the room . ''
`` The Ibbotsons , were they there ?
and the two new beauties , with the tall Irish officer , who is talked of for one of them . ''
`` I do not know .
I do not think they were . ''
`` Old Lady Mary Maclean ?
I need not ask after her .
She never misses , I know ; and you must have seen her .
She must have been in your own circle ; for as you went with Lady Dalrymple , you were in the seats of grandeur , round the orchestra , of course . ''
`` No , that was what I dreaded .
It would have been very unpleasant to me in every respect .
But happily Lady Dalrymple always chooses to be farther off ; and we were exceedingly well placed , that is , for hearing ; I must not say for seeing , because I appear to have seen very little . ''
`` Oh !
you saw enough for your own amusement .
I can understand .
There is a sort of domestic enjoyment to be known even in a crowd , and this you had .
You were a large party in yourselves , and you wanted nothing beyond . ''
`` But I ought to have looked about me more , '' said Anne , conscious while she spoke that there had in fact been no want of looking about , that the object only had been deficient .
`` No , no ; you were better employed .
You need not tell me that you had a pleasant evening .
I see it in your eye .
I perfectly see how the hours passed : that you had always something agreeable to listen to .
In the intervals of the concert it was conversation . ''
Anne half smiled and said , `` Do you see that in my eye ? ''
`` Yes , I do .
Your countenance perfectly informs me that you were in company last night with the person whom you think the most agreeable in the world , the person who interests you at this present time more than all the rest of the world put together . ''
A blush overspread Anne 's cheeks .
She could say nothing .
`` And such being the case , '' continued Mrs Smith , after a short pause , '' I hope you believe that I do know how to value your kindness in coming to me this morning .
It is really very good of you to come and sit with me , when you must have so many pleasanter demands upon your time . ''
Anne heard nothing of this .
She was still in the astonishment and confusion excited by her friend 's penetration , unable to imagine how any report of Captain Wentworth could have reached her .
After another short silence -- '' Pray , '' said Mrs Smith , `` is Mr Elliot aware of your acquaintance with me ?
Does he know that I am in Bath ? ''
`` Mr Elliot ! ''
repeated Anne , looking up surprised .
A moment 's reflection shewed her the mistake she had been under .
She caught it instantaneously ; and recovering her courage with the feeling of safety , soon added , more composedly , `` Are you acquainted with Mr Elliot ? ''
`` I have been a good deal acquainted with him , '' replied Mrs Smith , gravely , '' but it seems worn out now .
It is a great while since we met . ''
`` I was not at all aware of this .
You never mentioned it before .
Had I known it , I would have had the pleasure of talking to him about you . ''
`` To confess the truth , '' said Mrs Smith , assuming her usual air of cheerfulness , `` that is exactly the pleasure I want you to have .
I want you to talk about me to Mr Elliot .
I want your interest with him .
He can be of essential service to me ; and if you would have the goodness , my dear Miss Elliot , to make it an object to yourself , of course it is done . ''
`` I should be extremely happy ; I hope you can not doubt my willingness to be of even the slightest use to you , '' replied Anne ; `` but I suspect that you are considering me as having a higher claim on Mr Elliot , a greater right to influence him , than is really the case .
I am sure you have , somehow or other , imbibed such a notion .
You must consider me only as Mr Elliot 's relation .
If in that light there is anything which you suppose his cousin might fairly ask of him , I beg you would not hesitate to employ me . ''
Mrs Smith gave her a penetrating glance , and then , smiling , said -- '' I have been a little premature , I perceive ; I beg your pardon .
I ought to have waited for official information , But now , my dear Miss Elliot , as an old friend , do give me a hint as to when I may speak .
Next week ?
To be sure by next week I may be allowed to think it all settled , and build my own selfish schemes on Mr Elliot 's good fortune . ''
`` No , '' replied Anne , `` nor next week , nor next , nor next .
I assure you that nothing of the sort you are thinking of will be settled any week .
I am not going to marry Mr Elliot .
I should like to know why you imagine I am ? ''
Mrs Smith looked at her again , looked earnestly , smiled , shook her head , and exclaimed -- '' Now , how I do wish I understood you !
How I do wish I knew what you were at !
I have a great idea that you do not design to be cruel , when the right moment occurs .
Till it does come , you know , we women never mean to have anybody .
It is a thing of course among us , that every man is refused , till he offers .
But why should you be cruel ?
Let me plead for my -- present friend I can not call him , but for my former friend .
Where can you look for a more suitable match ?
Where could you expect a more gentlemanlike , agreeable man ?
Let me recommend Mr Elliot .
I am sure you hear nothing but good of him from Colonel Wallis ; and who can know him better than Colonel Wallis ? ''
`` My dear Mrs Smith , Mr Elliot 's wife has not been dead much above half a year .
He ought not to be supposed to be paying his addresses to any one . ''
`` Oh !
if these are your only objections , '' cried Mrs Smith , archly , '' Mr Elliot is safe , and I shall give myself no more trouble about him .
Do not forget me when you are married , that 's all .
Let him know me to be a friend of yours , and then he will think little of the trouble required , which it is very natural for him now , with so many affairs and engagements of his own , to avoid and get rid of as he can ; very natural , perhaps .
Ninety-nine out of a hundred would do the same .
Of course , he can not be aware of the importance to me .
Well , my dear Miss Elliot , I hope and trust you will be very happy .
Mr Elliot has sense to understand the value of such a woman .
Your peace will not be shipwrecked as mine has been .
You are safe in all worldly matters , and safe in his character .
He will not be led astray ; he will not be misled by others to his ruin . ''
`` No , '' said Anne , `` I can readily believe all that of my cousin .
He seems to have a calm decided temper , not at all open to dangerous impressions .
I consider him with great respect .
I have no reason , from any thing that has fallen within my observation , to do otherwise .
But I have not known him long ; and he is not a man , I think , to be known intimately soon .
Will not this manner of speaking of him , Mrs Smith , convince you that he is nothing to me ?
Surely this must be calm enough .
And , upon my word , he is nothing to me .
Should he ever propose to me ( which I have very little reason to imagine he has any thought of doing ) , I shall not accept him .
I assure you I shall not .
I assure you , Mr Elliot had not the share which you have been supposing , in whatever pleasure the concert of last night might afford : not Mr Elliot ; it is not Mr Elliot that -- '' She stopped , regretting with a deep blush that she had implied so much ; but less would hardly have been sufficient .
Mrs Smith would hardly have believed so soon in Mr Elliot 's failure , but from the perception of there being a somebody else .
As it was , she instantly submitted , and with all the semblance of seeing nothing beyond ; and Anne , eager to escape farther notice , was impatient to know why Mrs Smith should have fancied she was to marry Mr Elliot ; where she could have received the idea , or from whom she could have heard it .
`` Do tell me how it first came into your head . ''
`` It first came into my head , '' replied Mrs Smith , `` upon finding how much you were together , and feeling it to be the most probable thing in the world to be wished for by everybody belonging to either of you ; and you may depend upon it that all your acquaintance have disposed of you in the same way .
But I never heard it spoken of till two days ago . ''
`` And has it indeed been spoken of ? ''
`` Did you observe the woman who opened the door to you when you called yesterday ? ''
`` No .
Was not it Mrs Speed , as usual , or the maid ?
I observed no one in particular . ''
`` It was my friend Mrs Rooke ; Nurse Rooke ; who , by-the-bye , had a great curiosity to see you , and was delighted to be in the way to let you in .
She came away from Marlborough Buildings only on Sunday ; and she it was who told me you were to marry Mr Elliot .
She had had it from Mrs Wallis herself , which did not seem bad authority .
She sat an hour with me on Monday evening , and gave me the whole history . ''
`` The whole history , '' repeated Anne , laughing .
`` She could not make a very long history , I think , of one such little article of unfounded news . ''
Mrs Smith said nothing .
`` But , '' continued Anne , presently , `` though there is no truth in my having this claim on Mr Elliot , I should be extremely happy to be of use to you in any way that I could .
Shall I mention to him your being in Bath ?
Shall I take any message ? ''
`` No , I thank you : no , certainly not .
In the warmth of the moment , and under a mistaken impression , I might , perhaps , have endeavoured to interest you in some circumstances ; but not now .
No , I thank you , I have nothing to trouble you with . ''
`` I think you spoke of having known Mr Elliot many years ? ''
`` I did . ''
`` Not before he was married , I suppose ? ''
`` Yes ; he was not married when I knew him first . ''
`` And -- were you much acquainted ? ''
`` Intimately . ''
`` Indeed !
Then do tell me what he was at that time of life .
I have a great curiosity to know what Mr Elliot was as a very young man .
Was he at all such as he appears now ? ''
`` I have not seen Mr Elliot these three years , '' was Mrs Smith 's answer , given so gravely that it was impossible to pursue the subject farther ; and Anne felt that she had gained nothing but an increase of curiosity .
They were both silent : Mrs Smith very thoughtful .
At last -- '' I beg your pardon , my dear Miss Elliot , '' she cried , in her natural tone of cordiality , `` I beg your pardon for the short answers I have been giving you , but I have been uncertain what I ought to do .
I have been doubting and considering as to what I ought to tell you .
There were many things to be taken into the account .
One hates to be officious , to be giving bad impressions , making mischief .
Even the smooth surface of family-union seems worth preserving , though there may be nothing durable beneath .
However , I have determined ; I think I am right ; I think you ought to be made acquainted with Mr Elliot 's real character .
Though I fully believe that , at present , you have not the smallest intention of accepting him , there is no saying what may happen .
You might , some time or other , be differently affected towards him .
Hear the truth , therefore , now , while you are unprejudiced .
Mr Elliot is a man without heart or conscience ; a designing , wary , cold-blooded being , who thinks only of himself ; whom for his own interest or ease , would be guilty of any cruelty , or any treachery , that could be perpetrated without risk of his general character .
He has no feeling for others .
Those whom he has been the chief cause of leading into ruin , he can neglect and desert without the smallest compunction .
He is totally beyond the reach of any sentiment of justice or compassion .
Oh !
he is black at heart , hollow and black ! ''
Anne 's astonished air , and exclamation of wonder , made her pause , and in a calmer manner , she added , '' My expressions startle you .
You must allow for an injured , angry woman .
But I will try to command myself .
I will not abuse him .
I will only tell you what I have found him .
Facts shall speak .
He was the intimate friend of my dear husband , who trusted and loved him , and thought him as good as himself .
The intimacy had been formed before our marriage .
I found them most intimate friends ; and I , too , became excessively pleased with Mr Elliot , and entertained the highest opinion of him .
At nineteen , you know , one does not think very seriously ; but Mr Elliot appeared to me quite as good as others , and much more agreeable than most others , and we were almost always together .
We were principally in town , living in very good style .
He was then the inferior in circumstances ; he was then the poor one ; he had chambers in the Temple , and it was as much as he could do to support the appearance of a gentleman .
He had always a home with us whenever he chose it ; he was always welcome ; he was like a brother .
My poor Charles , who had the finest , most generous spirit in the world , would have divided his last farthing with him ; and I know that his purse was open to him ; I know that he often assisted him . ''
`` This must have been about that very period of Mr Elliot 's life , '' said Anne , `` which has always excited my particular curiosity .
It must have been about the same time that he became known to my father and sister .
I never knew him myself ; I only heard of him ; but there was a something in his conduct then , with regard to my father and sister , and afterwards in the circumstances of his marriage , which I never could quite reconcile with present times .
It seemed to announce a different sort of man . ''
`` I know it all , I know it all , '' cried Mrs Smith .
`` He had been introduced to Sir Walter and your sister before I was acquainted with him , but I heard him speak of them for ever .
I know he was invited and encouraged , and I know he did not choose to go .
I can satisfy you , perhaps , on points which you would little expect ; and as to his marriage , I knew all about it at the time .
I was privy to all the fors and againsts ; I was the friend to whom he confided his hopes and plans ; and though I did not know his wife previously , her inferior situation in society , indeed , rendered that impossible , yet I knew her all her life afterwards , or at least till within the last two years of her life , and can answer any question you may wish to put . ''
`` Nay , '' said Anne , `` I have no particular enquiry to make about her .
I have always understood they were not a happy couple .
But I should like to know why , at that time of his life , he should slight my father 's acquaintance as he did .
My father was certainly disposed to take very kind and proper notice of him .
Why did Mr Elliot draw back ? ''
`` Mr Elliot , '' replied Mrs Smith , `` at that period of his life , had one object in view : to make his fortune , and by a rather quicker process than the law .
He was determined to make it by marriage .
He was determined , at least , not to mar it by an imprudent marriage ; and I know it was his belief ( whether justly or not , of course I can not decide ) , that your father and sister , in their civilities and invitations , were designing a match between the heir and the young lady , and it was impossible that such a match should have answered his ideas of wealth and independence .
That was his motive for drawing back , I can assure you .
He told me the whole story .
He had no concealments with me .
It was curious , that having just left you behind me in Bath , my first and principal acquaintance on marrying should be your cousin ; and that , through him , I should be continually hearing of your father and sister .
He described one Miss Elliot , and I thought very affectionately of the other . ''
`` Perhaps , '' cried Anne , struck by a sudden idea , `` you sometimes spoke of me to Mr Elliot ? ''
`` To be sure I did ; very often .
I used to boast of my own Anne Elliot , and vouch for your being a very different creature from -- '' She checked herself just in time .
`` This accounts for something which Mr Elliot said last night , '' cried Anne .
`` This explains it .
I found he had been used to hear of me .
I could not comprehend how .
What wild imaginations one forms where dear self is concerned !
How sure to be mistaken !
But I beg your pardon ; I have interrupted you .
Mr Elliot married then completely for money ?
The circumstances , probably , which first opened your eyes to his character . ''
Mrs Smith hesitated a little here .
`` Oh !
those things are too common .
When one lives in the world , a man or woman 's marrying for money is too common to strike one as it ought .
I was very young , and associated only with the young , and we were a thoughtless , gay set , without any strict rules of conduct .
We lived for enjoyment .
I think differently now ; time and sickness and sorrow have given me other notions ; but at that period I must own I saw nothing reprehensible in what Mr Elliot was doing .
` To do the best for himself , ' passed as a duty . ''
`` But was not she a very low woman ? ''
`` Yes ; which I objected to , but he would not regard .
Money , money , was all that he wanted .
Her father was a grazier , her grandfather had been a butcher , but that was all nothing .
She was a fine woman , had had a decent education , was brought forward by some cousins , thrown by chance into Mr Elliot 's company , and fell in love with him ; and not a difficulty or a scruple was there on his side , with respect to her birth .
All his caution was spent in being secured of the real amount of her fortune , before he committed himself .
Depend upon it , whatever esteem Mr Elliot may have for his own situation in life now , as a young man he had not the smallest value for it .
His chance for the Kellynch estate was something , but all the honour of the family he held as cheap as dirt .
I have often heard him declare , that if baronetcies were saleable , anybody should have his for fifty pounds , arms and motto , name and livery included ; but I will not pretend to repeat half that I used to hear him say on that subject .
It would not be fair ; and yet you ought to have proof , for what is all this but assertion , and you shall have proof . ''
`` Indeed , my dear Mrs Smith , I want none , '' cried Anne .
`` You have asserted nothing contradictory to what Mr Elliot appeared to be some years ago .
This is all in confirmation , rather , of what we used to hear and believe .
I am more curious to know why he should be so different now . ''
`` But for my satisfaction , if you will have the goodness to ring for Mary ; stay : I am sure you will have the still greater goodness of going yourself into my bedroom , and bringing me the small inlaid box which you will find on the upper shelf of the closet . ''
Anne , seeing her friend to be earnestly bent on it , did as she was desired .
The box was brought and placed before her , and Mrs Smith , sighing over it as she unlocked it , said -- '' This is full of papers belonging to him , to my husband ; a small portion only of what I had to look over when I lost him .
The letter I am looking for was one written by Mr Elliot to him before our marriage , and happened to be saved ; why , one can hardly imagine .
But he was careless and immethodical , like other men , about those things ; and when I came to examine his papers , I found it with others still more trivial , from different people scattered here and there , while many letters and memorandums of real importance had been destroyed .
Here it is ; I would not burn it , because being even then very little satisfied with Mr Elliot , I was determined to preserve every document of former intimacy .
I have now another motive for being glad that I can produce it . ''
This was the letter , directed to `` Charles Smith , Esq .
Tunbridge Wells , '' and dated from London , as far back as July , 1803 : -- '' Dear Smith , -- I have received yours .
Your kindness almost overpowers me .
I wish nature had made such hearts as yours more common , but I have lived three-and-twenty years in the world , and have seen none like it .
At present , believe me , I have no need of your services , being in cash again .
Give me joy : I have got rid of Sir Walter and Miss .
They are gone back to Kellynch , and almost made me swear to visit them this summer ; but my first visit to Kellynch will be with a surveyor , to tell me how to bring it with best advantage to the hammer .
The baronet , nevertheless , is not unlikely to marry again ; he is quite fool enough .
If he does , however , they will leave me in peace , which may be a decent equivalent for the reversion .
He is worse than last year .
`` I wish I had any name but Elliot .
I am sick of it .
The name of Walter I can drop , thank God !
and I desire you will never insult me with my second W. again , meaning , for the rest of my life , to be only yours truly , -- Wm .
Elliot . ''
Such a letter could not be read without putting Anne in a glow ; and Mrs Smith , observing the high colour in her face , said -- '' The language , I know , is highly disrespectful .
Though I have forgot the exact terms , I have a perfect impression of the general meaning .
But it shows you the man .
Mark his professions to my poor husband .
Can any thing be stronger ? ''
Anne could not immediately get over the shock and mortification of finding such words applied to her father .
She was obliged to recollect that her seeing the letter was a violation of the laws of honour , that no one ought to be judged or to be known by such testimonies , that no private correspondence could bear the eye of others , before she could recover calmness enough to return the letter which she had been meditating over , and say -- '' Thank you .
This is full proof undoubtedly ; proof of every thing you were saying .
But why be acquainted with us now ? ''
`` I can explain this too , '' cried Mrs Smith , smiling .
`` Can you really ? ''
`` Yes .
I have shewn you Mr Elliot as he was a dozen years ago , and I will shew him as he is now .
I can not produce written proof again , but I can give as authentic oral testimony as you can desire , of what he is now wanting , and what he is now doing .
He is no hypocrite now .
He truly wants to marry you .
His present attentions to your family are very sincere : quite from the heart .
I will give you my authority : his friend Colonel Wallis . ''
`` Colonel Wallis !
you are acquainted with him ? ''
`` No .
It does not come to me in quite so direct a line as that ; it takes a bend or two , but nothing of consequence .
The stream is as good as at first ; the little rubbish it collects in the turnings is easily moved away .
Mr Elliot talks unreservedly to Colonel Wallis of his views on you , which said Colonel Wallis , I imagine to be , in himself , a sensible , careful , discerning sort of character ; but Colonel Wallis has a very pretty silly wife , to whom he tells things which he had better not , and he repeats it all to her .
She in the overflowing spirits of her recovery , repeats it all to her nurse ; and the nurse knowing my acquaintance with you , very naturally brings it all to me .
On Monday evening , my good friend Mrs Rooke let me thus much into the secrets of Marlborough Buildings .
When I talked of a whole history , therefore , you see I was not romancing so much as you supposed . ''
`` My dear Mrs Smith , your authority is deficient .
This will not do .
Mr Elliot 's having any views on me will not in the least account for the efforts he made towards a reconciliation with my father .
That was all prior to my coming to Bath .
I found them on the most friendly terms when I arrived . ''
`` I know you did ; I know it all perfectly , but -- '' '' Indeed , Mrs Smith , we must not expect to get real information in such a line .
Facts or opinions which are to pass through the hands of so many , to be misconceived by folly in one , and ignorance in another , can hardly have much truth left . ''
`` Only give me a hearing .
You will soon be able to judge of the general credit due , by listening to some particulars which you can yourself immediately contradict or confirm .
Nobody supposes that you were his first inducement .
He had seen you indeed , before he came to Bath , and admired you , but without knowing it to be you .
So says my historian , at least .
Is this true ?
Did he see you last summer or autumn , ` somewhere down in the west , ' to use her own words , without knowing it to be you ? ''
`` He certainly did .
So far it is very true .
At Lyme .
I happened to be at Lyme . ''
`` Well , '' continued Mrs Smith , triumphantly , `` grant my friend the credit due to the establishment of the first point asserted .
He saw you then at Lyme , and liked you so well as to be exceedingly pleased to meet with you again in Camden Place , as Miss Anne Elliot , and from that moment , I have no doubt , had a double motive in his visits there .
But there was another , and an earlier , which I will now explain .
If there is anything in my story which you know to be either false or improbable , stop me .
My account states , that your sister 's friend , the lady now staying with you , whom I have heard you mention , came to Bath with Miss Elliot and Sir Walter as long ago as September ( in short when they first came themselves ) , and has been staying there ever since ; that she is a clever , insinuating , handsome woman , poor and plausible , and altogether such in situation and manner , as to give a general idea , among Sir Walter 's acquaintance , of her meaning to be Lady Elliot , and as general a surprise that Miss Elliot should be apparently , blind to the danger . ''
Here Mrs Smith paused a moment ; but Anne had not a word to say , and she continued -- '' This was the light in which it appeared to those who knew the family , long before you returned to it ; and Colonel Wallis had his eye upon your father enough to be sensible of it , though he did not then visit in Camden Place ; but his regard for Mr Elliot gave him an interest in watching all that was going on there , and when Mr Elliot came to Bath for a day or two , as he happened to do a little before Christmas , Colonel Wallis made him acquainted with the appearance of things , and the reports beginning to prevail .
Now you are to understand , that time had worked a very material change in Mr Elliot 's opinions as to the value of a baronetcy .
Upon all points of blood and connexion he is a completely altered man .
Having long had as much money as he could spend , nothing to wish for on the side of avarice or indulgence , he has been gradually learning to pin his happiness upon the consequence he is heir to .
I thought it coming on before our acquaintance ceased , but it is now a confirmed feeling .
He can not bear the idea of not being Sir William .
You may guess , therefore , that the news he heard from his friend could not be very agreeable , and you may guess what it produced ; the resolution of coming back to Bath as soon as possible , and of fixing himself here for a time , with the view of renewing his former acquaintance , and recovering such a footing in the family as might give him the means of ascertaining the degree of his danger , and of circumventing the lady if he found it material .
This was agreed upon between the two friends as the only thing to be done ; and Colonel Wallis was to assist in every way that he could .
He was to be introduced , and Mrs Wallis was to be introduced , and everybody was to be introduced .
Mr Elliot came back accordingly ; and on application was forgiven , as you know , and re-admitted into the family ; and there it was his constant object , and his only object ( till your arrival added another motive ) , to watch Sir Walter and Mrs Clay .
He omitted no opportunity of being with them , threw himself in their way , called at all hours ; but I need not be particular on this subject .
You can imagine what an artful man would do ; and with this guide , perhaps , may recollect what you have seen him do . ''
`` Yes , '' said Anne , `` you tell me nothing which does not accord with what I have known , or could imagine .
There is always something offensive in the details of cunning .
The manoeuvres of selfishness and duplicity must ever be revolting , but I have heard nothing which really surprises me .
I know those who would be shocked by such a representation of Mr Elliot , who would have difficulty in believing it ; but I have never been satisfied .
I have always wanted some other motive for his conduct than appeared .
I should like to know his present opinion , as to the probability of the event he has been in dread of ; whether he considers the danger to be lessening or not . ''
`` Lessening , I understand , '' replied Mrs Smith .
`` He thinks Mrs Clay afraid of him , aware that he sees through her , and not daring to proceed as she might do in his absence .
But since he must be absent some time or other , I do not perceive how he can ever be secure while she holds her present influence .
Mrs Wallis has an amusing idea , as nurse tells me , that it is to be put into the marriage articles when you and Mr Elliot marry , that your father is not to marry Mrs Clay .
A scheme , worthy of Mrs Wallis 's understanding , by all accounts ; but my sensible nurse Rooke sees the absurdity of it .
` Why , to be sure , ma'am , ' said she , ` it would not prevent his marrying anybody else . '
And , indeed , to own the truth , I do not think nurse , in her heart , is a very strenuous opposer of Sir Walter 's making a second match .
She must be allowed to be a favourer of matrimony , you know ; and ( since self will intrude ) who can say that she may not have some flying visions of attending the next Lady Elliot , through Mrs Wallis 's recommendation ? ''
`` I am very glad to know all this , '' said Anne , after a little thoughtfulness .
`` It will be more painful to me in some respects to be in company with him , but I shall know better what to do .
My line of conduct will be more direct .
Mr Elliot is evidently a disingenuous , artificial , worldly man , who has never had any better principle to guide him than selfishness . ''
But Mr Elliot was not done with .
Mrs Smith had been carried away from her first direction , and Anne had forgotten , in the interest of her own family concerns , how much had been originally implied against him ; but her attention was now called to the explanation of those first hints , and she listened to a recital which , if it did not perfectly justify the unqualified bitterness of Mrs Smith , proved him to have been very unfeeling in his conduct towards her ; very deficient both in justice and compassion .
She learned that ( the intimacy between them continuing unimpaired by Mr Elliot 's marriage ) they had been as before always together , and Mr Elliot had led his friend into expenses much beyond his fortune .
Mrs Smith did not want to take blame to herself , and was most tender of throwing any on her husband ; but Anne could collect that their income had never been equal to their style of living , and that from the first there had been a great deal of general and joint extravagance .
From his wife 's account of him she could discern Mr Smith to have been a man of warm feelings , easy temper , careless habits , and not strong understanding , much more amiable than his friend , and very unlike him , led by him , and probably despised by him .
Mr Elliot , raised by his marriage to great affluence , and disposed to every gratification of pleasure and vanity which could be commanded without involving himself , ( for with all his self-indulgence he had become a prudent man ) , and beginning to be rich , just as his friend ought to have found himself to be poor , seemed to have had no concern at all for that friend's probable finances , but , on the contrary , had been prompting and encouraging expenses which could end only in ruin ; and the Smiths accordingly had been ruined .
The husband had died just in time to be spared the full knowledge of it .
They had previously known embarrassments enough to try the friendship of their friends , and to prove that Mr Elliot 's had better not be tried ; but it was not till his death that the wretched state of his affairs was fully known .
With a confidence in Mr Elliot 's regard , more creditable to his feelings than his judgement , Mr Smith had appointed him the executor of his will ; but Mr Elliot would not act , and the difficulties and distress which this refusal had heaped on her , in addition to the inevitable sufferings of her situation , had been such as could not be related without anguish of spirit , or listened to without corresponding indignation .
Anne was shewn some letters of his on the occasion , answers to urgent applications from Mrs Smith , which all breathed the same stern resolution of not engaging in a fruitless trouble , and , under a cold civility , the same hard-hearted indifference to any of the evils it might bring on her .
It was a dreadful picture of ingratitude and inhumanity ; and Anne felt , at some moments , that no flagrant open crime could have been worse .
She had a great deal to listen to ; all the particulars of past sad scenes , all the minutiae of distress upon distress , which in former conversations had been merely hinted at , were dwelt on now with a natural indulgence .
Anne could perfectly comprehend the exquisite relief , and was only the more inclined to wonder at the composure of her friend's usual state of mind .
There was one circumstance in the history of her grievances of particular irritation .
She had good reason to believe that some property of her husband in the West Indies , which had been for many years under a sort of sequestration for the payment of its own incumbrances , might be recoverable by proper measures ; and this property , though not large , would be enough to make her comparatively rich .
But there was nobody to stir in it .
Mr Elliot would do nothing , and she could do nothing herself , equally disabled from personal exertion by her state of bodily weakness , and from employing others by her want of money .
She had no natural connexions to assist her even with their counsel , and she could not afford to purchase the assistance of the law .
This was a cruel aggravation of actually straitened means .
To feel that she ought to be in better circumstances , that a little trouble in the right place might do it , and to fear that delay might be even weakening her claims , was hard to bear .
It was on this point that she had hoped to engage Anne 's good offices with Mr Elliot .
She had previously , in the anticipation of their marriage , been very apprehensive of losing her friend by it ; but on being assured that he could have made no attempt of that nature , since he did not even know her to be in Bath , it immediately occurred , that something might be done in her favour by the influence of the woman he loved , and she had been hastily preparing to interest Anne 's feelings , as far as the observances due to Mr Elliot 's character would allow , when Anne 's refutation of the supposed engagement changed the face of everything ; and while it took from her the new-formed hope of succeeding in the object of her first anxiety , left her at least the comfort of telling the whole story her own way .
After listening to this full description of Mr Elliot , Anne could not but express some surprise at Mrs Smith 's having spoken of him so favourably in the beginning of their conversation .
`` She had seemed to recommend and praise him ! ''
`` My dear , '' was Mrs Smith 's reply , `` there was nothing else to be done .
I considered your marrying him as certain , though he might not yet have made the offer , and I could no more speak the truth of him , than if he had been your husband .
My heart bled for you , as I talked of happiness ; and yet he is sensible , he is agreeable , and with such a woman as you , it was not absolutely hopeless .
He was very unkind to his first wife .
They were wretched together .
But she was too ignorant and giddy for respect , and he had never loved her .
I was willing to hope that you must fare better . ''
Anne could just acknowledge within herself such a possibility of having been induced to marry him , as made her shudder at the idea of the misery which must have followed .
It was just possible that she might have been persuaded by Lady Russell !
And under such a supposition , which would have been most miserable , when time had disclosed all , too late ?
It was very desirable that Lady Russell should be no longer deceived ; and one of the concluding arrangements of this important conference , which carried them through the greater part of the morning , was , that Anne had full liberty to communicate to her friend everything relative to Mrs Smith , in which his conduct was involved .
Chapter 22 Anne went home to think over all that she had heard .
In one point , her feelings were relieved by this knowledge of Mr Elliot .
There was no longer anything of tenderness due to him .
He stood as opposed to Captain Wentworth , in all his own unwelcome obtrusiveness ; and the evil of his attentions last night , the irremediable mischief he might have done , was considered with sensations unqualified , unperplexed .
Pity for him was all over .
But this was the only point of relief .
In every other respect , in looking around her , or penetrating forward , she saw more to distrust and to apprehend .
She was concerned for the disappointment and pain Lady Russell would be feeling ; for the mortifications which must be hanging over her father and sister , and had all the distress of foreseeing many evils , without knowing how to avert any one of them .
She was most thankful for her own knowledge of him .
She had never considered herself as entitled to reward for not slighting an old friend like Mrs Smith , but here was a reward indeed springing from it !
Mrs Smith had been able to tell her what no one else could have done .
Could the knowledge have been extended through her family ?
But this was a vain idea .
She must talk to Lady Russell , tell her , consult with her , and having done her best , wait the event with as much composure as possible ; and after all , her greatest want of composure would be in that quarter of the mind which could not be opened to Lady Russell ; in that flow of anxieties and fears which must be all to herself .
She found , on reaching home , that she had , as she intended , escaped seeing Mr Elliot ; that he had called and paid them a long morning visit ; but hardly had she congratulated herself , and felt safe , when she heard that he was coming again in the evening .
`` I had not the smallest intention of asking him , '' said Elizabeth , with affected carelessness , `` but he gave so many hints ; so Mrs Clay says , at least . ''
`` Indeed , I do say it .
I never saw anybody in my life spell harder for an invitation .
Poor man !
I was really in pain for him ; for your hard-hearted sister , Miss Anne , seems bent on cruelty . ''
`` Oh ! ''
cried Elizabeth , `` I have been rather too much used to the game to be soon overcome by a gentleman 's hints .
However , when I found how excessively he was regretting that he should miss my father this morning , I gave way immediately , for I would never really omit an opportunity of bring him and Sir Walter together .
They appear to so much advantage in company with each other .
Each behaving so pleasantly .
Mr Elliot looking up with so much respect . ''
`` Quite delightful ! ''
cried Mrs Clay , not daring , however , to turn her eyes towards Anne .
`` Exactly like father and son !
Dear Miss Elliot , may I not say father and son ? ''
`` Oh !
I lay no embargo on any body 's words .
If you will have such ideas !
But , upon my word , I am scarcely sensible of his attentions being beyond those of other men . ''
`` My dear Miss Elliot ! ''
exclaimed Mrs Clay , lifting her hands and eyes , and sinking all the rest of her astonishment in a convenient silence .
`` Well , my dear Penelope , you need not be so alarmed about him .
I did invite him , you know .
I sent him away with smiles .
When I found he was really going to his friends at Thornberry Park for the whole day to-morrow , I had compassion on him . ''
Anne admired the good acting of the friend , in being able to shew such pleasure as she did , in the expectation and in the actual arrival of the very person whose presence must really be interfering with her prime object .
It was impossible but that Mrs Clay must hate the sight of Mr Elliot ; and yet she could assume a most obliging , placid look , and appear quite satisfied with the curtailed license of devoting herself only half as much to Sir Walter as she would have done otherwise .
To Anne herself it was most distressing to see Mr Elliot enter the room ; and quite painful to have him approach and speak to her .
She had been used before to feel that he could not be always quite sincere , but now she saw insincerity in everything .
His attentive deference to her father , contrasted with his former language , was odious ; and when she thought of his cruel conduct towards Mrs Smith , she could hardly bear the sight of his present smiles and mildness , or the sound of his artificial good sentiments .
She meant to avoid any such alteration of manners as might provoke a remonstrance on his side .
It was a great object to her to escape all enquiry or eclat ; but it was her intention to be as decidedly cool to him as might be compatible with their relationship ; and to retrace , as quietly as she could , the few steps of unnecessary intimacy she had been gradually led along .
She was accordingly more guarded , and more cool , than she had been the night before .
He wanted to animate her curiosity again as to how and where he could have heard her formerly praised ; wanted very much to be gratified by more solicitation ; but the charm was broken : he found that the heat and animation of a public room was necessary to kindle his modest cousin 's vanity ; he found , at least , that it was not to be done now , by any of those attempts which he could hazard among the too-commanding claims of the others .
He little surmised that it was a subject acting now exactly against his interest , bringing immediately to her thoughts all those parts of his conduct which were least excusable .
She had some satisfaction in finding that he was really going out of Bath the next morning , going early , and that he would be gone the greater part of two days .
He was invited again to Camden Place the very evening of his return ; but from Thursday to Saturday evening his absence was certain .
It was bad enough that a Mrs Clay should be always before her ; but that a deeper hypocrite should be added to their party , seemed the destruction of everything like peace and comfort .
It was so humiliating to reflect on the constant deception practised on her father and Elizabeth ; to consider the various sources of mortification preparing for them !
Mrs Clay 's selfishness was not so complicate nor so revolting as his ; and Anne would have compounded for the marriage at once , with all its evils , to be clear of Mr Elliot's subtleties in endeavouring to prevent it .
On Friday morning she meant to go very early to Lady Russell , and accomplish the necessary communication ; and she would have gone directly after breakfast , but that Mrs Clay was also going out on some obliging purpose of saving her sister trouble , which determined her to wait till she might be safe from such a companion .
She saw Mrs Clay fairly off , therefore , before she began to talk of spending the morning in Rivers Street .
`` Very well , '' said Elizabeth , `` I have nothing to send but my love .
Oh !
you may as well take back that tiresome book she would lend me , and pretend I have read it through .
I really can not be plaguing myself for ever with all the new poems and states of the nation that come out .
Lady Russell quite bores one with her new publications .
You need not tell her so , but I thought her dress hideous the other night .
I used to think she had some taste in dress , but I was ashamed of her at the concert .
Something so formal and arrange in her air !
and she sits so upright !
My best love , of course . ''
`` And mine , '' added Sir Walter .
`` Kindest regards .
And you may say , that I mean to call upon her soon .
Make a civil message ; but I shall only leave my card .
Morning visits are never fair by women at her time of life , who make themselves up so little .
If she would only wear rouge she would not be afraid of being seen ; but last time I called , I observed the blinds were let down immediately . ''
While her father spoke , there was a knock at the door .
Who could it be ?
Anne , remembering the preconcerted visits , at all hours , of Mr Elliot , would have expected him , but for his known engagement seven miles off .
After the usual period of suspense , the usual sounds of approach were heard , and `` Mr and Mrs Charles Musgrove '' were ushered into the room .
Surprise was the strongest emotion raised by their appearance ; but Anne was really glad to see them ; and the others were not so sorry but that they could put on a decent air of welcome ; and as soon as it became clear that these , their nearest relations , were not arrived with an views of accommodation in that house , Sir Walter and Elizabeth were able to rise in cordiality , and do the honours of it very well .
They were come to Bath for a few days with Mrs Musgrove , and were at the White Hart .
So much was pretty soon understood ; but till Sir Walter and Elizabeth were walking Mary into the other drawing-room , and regaling themselves with her admiration , Anne could not draw upon Charles 's brain for a regular history of their coming , or an explanation of some smiling hints of particular business , which had been ostentatiously dropped by Mary , as well as of some apparent confusion as to whom their party consisted of .
She then found that it consisted of Mrs Musgrove , Henrietta , and Captain Harville , beside their two selves .
He gave her a very plain , intelligible account of the whole ; a narration in which she saw a great deal of most characteristic proceeding .
The scheme had received its first impulse by Captain Harville 's wanting to come to Bath on business .
He had begun to talk of it a week ago ; and by way of doing something , as shooting was over , Charles had proposed coming with him , and Mrs Harville had seemed to like the idea of it very much , as an advantage to her husband ; but Mary could not bear to be left , and had made herself so unhappy about it , that for a day or two everything seemed to be in suspense , or at an end .
But then , it had been taken up by his father and mother .
His mother had some old friends in Bath whom she wanted to see ; it was thought a good opportunity for Henrietta to come and buy wedding-clothes for herself and her sister ; and , in short , it ended in being his mother 's party , that everything might be comfortable and easy to Captain Harville ; and he and Mary were included in it by way of general convenience .
They had arrived late the night before .
Mrs Harville , her children , and Captain Benwick , remained with Mr Musgrove and Louisa at Uppercross .
Anne 's only surprise was , that affairs should be in forwardness enough for Henrietta 's wedding-clothes to be talked of .
She had imagined such difficulties of fortune to exist there as must prevent the marriage from being near at hand ; but she learned from Charles that , very recently , ( since Mary 's last letter to herself ) , Charles Hayter had been applied to by a friend to hold a living for a youth who could not possibly claim it under many years ; and that on the strength of his present income , with almost a certainty of something more permanent long before the term in question , the two families had consented to the young people 's wishes , and that their marriage was likely to take place in a few months , quite as soon as Louisa 's .
`` And a very good living it was , '' Charles added : `` only five-and-twenty miles from Uppercross , and in a very fine country : fine part of Dorsetshire .
In the centre of some of the best preserves in the kingdom , surrounded by three great proprietors , each more careful and jealous than the other ; and to two of the three at least , Charles Hayter might get a special recommendation .
Not that he will value it as he ought , '' he observed , `` Charles is too cool about sporting .
That 's the worst of him . ''
`` I am extremely glad , indeed , '' cried Anne , `` particularly glad that this should happen ; and that of two sisters , who both deserve equally well , and who have always been such good friends , the pleasant prospect of one should not be dimming those of the other -- that they should be so equal in their prosperity and comfort .
I hope your father and mother are quite happy with regard to both . ''
`` Oh !
yes .
My father would be well pleased if the gentlemen were richer , but he has no other fault to find .
Money , you know , coming down with money -- two daughters at once -- it can not be a very agreeable operation , and it streightens him as to many things .
However , I do not mean to say they have not a right to it .
It is very fit they should have daughters ' shares ; and I am sure he has always been a very kind , liberal father to me .
Mary does not above half like Henrietta 's match .
She never did , you know .
But she does not do him justice , nor think enough about Winthrop .
I can not make her attend to the value of the property .
It is a very fair match , as times go ; and I have liked Charles Hayter all my life , and I shall not leave off now . ''
`` Such excellent parents as Mr and Mrs Musgrove , '' exclaimed Anne , '' should be happy in their children 's marriages .
They do everything to confer happiness , I am sure .
What a blessing to young people to be in such hands !
Your father and mother seem so totally free from all those ambitious feelings which have led to so much misconduct and misery , both in young and old .
I hope you think Louisa perfectly recovered now ? ''
He answered rather hesitatingly , `` Yes , I believe I do ; very much recovered ; but she is altered ; there is no running or jumping about , no laughing or dancing ; it is quite different .
If one happens only to shut the door a little hard , she starts and wriggles like a young dab-chick in the water ; and Benwick sits at her elbow , reading verses , or whispering to her , all day long . ''
Anne could not help laughing .
`` That can not be much to your taste , I know , '' said she ; `` but I do believe him to be an excellent young man . ''
`` To be sure he is .
Nobody doubts it ; and I hope you do not think I am so illiberal as to want every man to have the same objects and pleasures as myself .
I have a great value for Benwick ; and when one can but get him to talk , he has plenty to say .
His reading has done him no harm , for he has fought as well as read .
He is a brave fellow .
I got more acquainted with him last Monday than ever I did before .
We had a famous set-to at rat-hunting all the morning in my father 's great barns ; and he played his part so well that I have liked him the better ever since . ''
Here they were interrupted by the absolute necessity of Charles's following the others to admire mirrors and china ; but Anne had heard enough to understand the present state of Uppercross , and rejoice in its happiness ; and though she sighed as she rejoiced , her sigh had none of the ill-will of envy in it .
She would certainly have risen to their blessings if she could , but she did not want to lessen theirs .
The visit passed off altogether in high good humour .
Mary was in excellent spirits , enjoying the gaiety and the change , and so well satisfied with the journey in her mother-in-law 's carriage with four horses , and with her own complete independence of Camden Place , that she was exactly in a temper to admire everything as she ought , and enter most readily into all the superiorities of the house , as they were detailed to her .
She had no demands on her father or sister , and her consequence was just enough increased by their handsome drawing-rooms .
Elizabeth was , for a short time , suffering a good deal .
She felt that Mrs Musgrove and all her party ought to be asked to dine with them ; but she could not bear to have the difference of style , the reduction of servants , which a dinner must betray , witnessed by those who had been always so inferior to the Elliots of Kellynch .
It was a struggle between propriety and vanity ; but vanity got the better , and then Elizabeth was happy again .
These were her internal persuasions : '' Old fashioned notions ; country hospitality ; we do not profess to give dinners ; few people in Bath do ; Lady Alicia never does ; did not even ask her own sister 's family , though they were here a month : and I dare say it would be very inconvenient to Mrs Musgrove ; put her quite out of her way .
I am sure she would rather not come ; she can not feel easy with us .
I will ask them all for an evening ; that will be much better ; that will be a novelty and a treat .
They have not seen two such drawing rooms before .
They will be delighted to come to-morrow evening .
It shall be a regular party , small , but most elegant . ''
And this satisfied Elizabeth : and when the invitation was given to the two present , and promised for the absent , Mary was as completely satisfied .
She was particularly asked to meet Mr Elliot , and be introduced to Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret , who were fortunately already engaged to come ; and she could not have received a more gratifying attention .
Miss Elliot was to have the honour of calling on Mrs Musgrove in the course of the morning ; and Anne walked off with Charles and Mary , to go and see her and Henrietta directly .
Her plan of sitting with Lady Russell must give way for the present .
They all three called in Rivers Street for a couple of minutes ; but Anne convinced herself that a day 's delay of the intended communication could be of no consequence , and hastened forward to the White Hart , to see again the friends and companions of the last autumn , with an eagerness of good-will which many associations contributed to form .
They found Mrs Musgrove and her daughter within , and by themselves , and Anne had the kindest welcome from each .
Henrietta was exactly in that state of recently-improved views , of fresh-formed happiness , which made her full of regard and interest for everybody she had ever liked before at all ; and Mrs Musgrove 's real affection had been won by her usefulness when they were in distress .
It was a heartiness , and a warmth , and a sincerity which Anne delighted in the more , from the sad want of such blessings at home .
She was entreated to give them as much of her time as possible , invited for every day and all day long , or rather claimed as part of the family ; and , in return , she naturally fell into all her wonted ways of attention and assistance , and on Charles 's leaving them together , was listening to Mrs Musgrove's history of Louisa , and to Henrietta 's of herself , giving opinions on business , and recommendations to shops ; with intervals of every help which Mary required , from altering her ribbon to settling her accounts ; from finding her keys , and assorting her trinkets , to trying to convince her that she was not ill-used by anybody ; which Mary , well amused as she generally was , in her station at a window overlooking the entrance to the Pump Room , could not but have her moments of imagining .
A morning of thorough confusion was to be expected .
A large party in an hotel ensured a quick-changing , unsettled scene .
One five minutes brought a note , the next a parcel ; and Anne had not been there half an hour , when their dining-room , spacious as it was , seemed more than half filled : a party of steady old friends were seated around Mrs Musgrove , and Charles came back with Captains Harville and Wentworth .
The appearance of the latter could not be more than the surprise of the moment .
It was impossible for her to have forgotten to feel that this arrival of their common friends must be soon bringing them together again .
Their last meeting had been most important in opening his feelings ; she had derived from it a delightful conviction ; but she feared from his looks , that the same unfortunate persuasion , which had hastened him away from the Concert Room , still governed .
He did not seem to want to be near enough for conversation .
She tried to be calm , and leave things to take their course , and tried to dwell much on this argument of rational dependence : -- '' Surely , if there be constant attachment on each side , our hearts must understand each other ere long .
We are not boy and girl , to be captiously irritable , misled by every moment 's inadvertence , and wantonly playing with our own happiness . ''
And yet , a few minutes afterwards , she felt as if their being in company with each other , under their present circumstances , could only be exposing them to inadvertencies and misconstructions of the most mischievous kind .
`` Anne , '' cried Mary , still at her window , `` there is Mrs Clay , I am sure , standing under the colonnade , and a gentleman with her .
I saw them turn the corner from Bath Street just now .
They seemed deep in talk .
Who is it ?
Come , and tell me .
Good heavens !
I recollect .
It is Mr Elliot himself . ''
`` No , '' cried Anne , quickly , `` it can not be Mr Elliot , I assure you .
He was to leave Bath at nine this morning , and does not come back till to-morrow . ''
As she spoke , she felt that Captain Wentworth was looking at her , the consciousness of which vexed and embarrassed her , and made her regret that she had said so much , simple as it was .
Mary , resenting that she should be supposed not to know her own cousin , began talking very warmly about the family features , and protesting still more positively that it was Mr Elliot , calling again upon Anne to come and look for herself , but Anne did not mean to stir , and tried to be cool and unconcerned .
Her distress returned , however , on perceiving smiles and intelligent glances pass between two or three of the lady visitors , as if they believed themselves quite in the secret .
It was evident that the report concerning her had spread , and a short pause succeeded , which seemed to ensure that it would now spread farther .
`` Do come , Anne '' cried Mary , `` come and look yourself .
You will be too late if you do not make haste .
They are parting ; they are shaking hands .
He is turning away .
Not know Mr Elliot , indeed !
You seem to have forgot all about Lyme . ''
To pacify Mary , and perhaps screen her own embarrassment , Anne did move quietly to the window .
She was just in time to ascertain that it really was Mr Elliot , which she had never believed , before he disappeared on one side , as Mrs Clay walked quickly off on the other ; and checking the surprise which she could not but feel at such an appearance of friendly conference between two persons of totally opposite interest , she calmly said , `` Yes , it is Mr Elliot , certainly .
He has changed his hour of going , I suppose , that is all , or I may be mistaken , I might not attend ; '' and walked back to her chair , recomposed , and with the comfortable hope of having acquitted herself well .
The visitors took their leave ; and Charles , having civilly seen them off , and then made a face at them , and abused them for coming , began with -- '' Well , mother , I have done something for you that you will like .
I have been to the theatre , and secured a box for to-morrow night .
A'n't I a good boy ?
I know you love a play ; and there is room for us all .
It holds nine .
I have engaged Captain Wentworth .
Anne will not be sorry to join us , I am sure .
We all like a play .
Have not I done well , mother ? ''
Mrs Musgrove was good humouredly beginning to express her perfect readiness for the play , if Henrietta and all the others liked it , when Mary eagerly interrupted her by exclaiming -- '' Good heavens , Charles !
how can you think of such a thing ?
Take a box for to-morrow night !
Have you forgot that we are engaged to Camden Place to-morrow night ?
and that we were most particularly asked to meet Lady Dalrymple and her daughter , and Mr Elliot , and all the principal family connexions , on purpose to be introduced to them ?
How can you be so forgetful ? ''
`` Phoo !
phoo ! ''
replied Charles , `` what 's an evening party ?
Never worth remembering .
Your father might have asked us to dinner , I think , if he had wanted to see us .
You may do as you like , but I shall go to the play . ''
`` Oh !
Charles , I declare it will be too abominable if you do , when you promised to go . ''
`` No , I did not promise .
I only smirked and bowed , and said the word ` happy . '
There was no promise . ''
`` But you must go , Charles .
It would be unpardonable to fail .
We were asked on purpose to be introduced .
There was always such a great connexion between the Dalrymples and ourselves .
Nothing ever happened on either side that was not announced immediately .
We are quite near relations , you know ; and Mr Elliot too , whom you ought so particularly to be acquainted with !
Every attention is due to Mr Elliot .
Consider , my father 's heir : the future representative of the family . ''
`` Do n't talk to me about heirs and representatives , '' cried Charles .
`` I am not one of those who neglect the reigning power to bow to the rising sun .
If I would not go for the sake of your father , I should think it scandalous to go for the sake of his heir .
What is Mr Elliot to me ? ''
The careless expression was life to Anne , who saw that Captain Wentworth was all attention , looking and listening with his whole soul ; and that the last words brought his enquiring eyes from Charles to herself .
Charles and Mary still talked on in the same style ; he , half serious and half jesting , maintaining the scheme for the play , and she , invariably serious , most warmly opposing it , and not omitting to make it known that , however determined to go to Camden Place herself , she should not think herself very well used , if they went to the play without her .
Mrs Musgrove interposed .
`` We had better put it off .
Charles , you had much better go back and change the box for Tuesday .
It would be a pity to be divided , and we should be losing Miss Anne , too , if there is a party at her father 's ; and I am sure neither Henrietta nor I should care at all for the play , if Miss Anne could not be with us . ''
Anne felt truly obliged to her for such kindness ; and quite as much so for the opportunity it gave her of decidedly saying -- '' If it depended only on my inclination , ma'am , the party at home ( excepting on Mary 's account ) would not be the smallest impediment .
I have no pleasure in the sort of meeting , and should be too happy to change it for a play , and with you .
But , it had better not be attempted , perhaps . ''
She had spoken it ; but she trembled when it was done , conscious that her words were listened to , and daring not even to try to observe their effect .
It was soon generally agreed that Tuesday should be the day ; Charles only reserving the advantage of still teasing his wife , by persisting that he would go to the play to-morrow if nobody else would .
Captain Wentworth left his seat , and walked to the fire-place ; probably for the sake of walking away from it soon afterwards , and taking a station , with less bare-faced design , by Anne .
`` You have not been long enough in Bath , '' said he , `` to enjoy the evening parties of the place . ''
`` Oh !
no .
The usual character of them has nothing for me .
I am no card-player . ''
`` You were not formerly , I know .
You did not use to like cards ; but time makes many changes . ''
`` I am not yet so much changed , '' cried Anne , and stopped , fearing she hardly knew what misconstruction .
After waiting a few moments he said , and as if it were the result of immediate feeling , '' It is a period , indeed !
Eight years and a half is a period . ''
Whether he would have proceeded farther was left to Anne 's imagination to ponder over in a calmer hour ; for while still hearing the sounds he had uttered , she was startled to other subjects by Henrietta , eager to make use of the present leisure for getting out , and calling on her companions to lose no time , lest somebody else should come in .
They were obliged to move .
Anne talked of being perfectly ready , and tried to look it ; but she felt that could Henrietta have known the regret and reluctance of her heart in quitting that chair , in preparing to quit the room , she would have found , in all her own sensations for her cousin , in the very security of his affection , wherewith to pity her .
Their preparations , however , were stopped short .
Alarming sounds were heard ; other visitors approached , and the door was thrown open for Sir Walter and Miss Elliot , whose entrance seemed to give a general chill .
Anne felt an instant oppression , and wherever she looked saw symptoms of the same .
The comfort , the freedom , the gaiety of the room was over , hushed into cold composure , determined silence , or insipid talk , to meet the heartless elegance of her father and sister .
How mortifying to feel that it was so !
Her jealous eye was satisfied in one particular .
Captain Wentworth was acknowledged again by each , by Elizabeth more graciously than before .
She even addressed him once , and looked at him more than once .
Elizabeth was , in fact , revolving a great measure .
The sequel explained it .
After the waste of a few minutes in saying the proper nothings , she began to give the invitation which was to comprise all the remaining dues of the Musgroves .
`` To-morrow evening , to meet a few friends : no formal party . ''
It was all said very gracefully , and the cards with which she had provided herself , the `` Miss Elliot at home , '' were laid on the table , with a courteous , comprehensive smile to all , and one smile and one card more decidedly for Captain Wentworth .
The truth was , that Elizabeth had been long enough in Bath to understand the importance of a man of such an air and appearance as his .
The past was nothing .
The present was that Captain Wentworth would move about well in her drawing-room .
The card was pointedly given , and Sir Walter and Elizabeth arose and disappeared .
The interruption had been short , though severe , and ease and animation returned to most of those they left as the door shut them out , but not to Anne .
She could think only of the invitation she had with such astonishment witnessed , and of the manner in which it had been received ; a manner of doubtful meaning , of surprise rather than gratification , of polite acknowledgement rather than acceptance .
She knew him ; she saw disdain in his eye , and could not venture to believe that he had determined to accept such an offering , as an atonement for all the insolence of the past .
Her spirits sank .
He held the card in his hand after they were gone , as if deeply considering it .
`` Only think of Elizabeth 's including everybody ! ''
whispered Mary very audibly .
`` I do not wonder Captain Wentworth is delighted !
You see he can not put the card out of his hand . ''
Anne caught his eye , saw his cheeks glow , and his mouth form itself into a momentary expression of contempt , and turned away , that she might neither see nor hear more to vex her .
The party separated .
The gentlemen had their own pursuits , the ladies proceeded on their own business , and they met no more while Anne belonged to them .
She was earnestly begged to return and dine , and give them all the rest of the day , but her spirits had been so long exerted that at present she felt unequal to more , and fit only for home , where she might be sure of being as silent as she chose .
Promising to be with them the whole of the following morning , therefore , she closed the fatigues of the present by a toilsome walk to Camden Place , there to spend the evening chiefly in listening to the busy arrangements of Elizabeth and Mrs Clay for the morrow 's party , the frequent enumeration of the persons invited , and the continually improving detail of all the embellishments which were to make it the most completely elegant of its kind in Bath , while harassing herself with the never-ending question , of whether Captain Wentworth would come or not ?
They were reckoning him as certain , but with her it was a gnawing solicitude never appeased for five minutes together .
She generally thought he would come , because she generally thought he ought ; but it was a case which she could not so shape into any positive act of duty or discretion , as inevitably to defy the suggestions of very opposite feelings .
She only roused herself from the broodings of this restless agitation , to let Mrs Clay know that she had been seen with Mr Elliot three hours after his being supposed to be out of Bath , for having watched in vain for some intimation of the interview from the lady herself , she determined to mention it , and it seemed to her there was guilt in Mrs Clay 's face as she listened .
It was transient : cleared away in an instant ; but Anne could imagine she read there the consciousness of having , by some complication of mutual trick , or some overbearing authority of his , been obliged to attend ( perhaps for half an hour ) to his lectures and restrictions on her designs on Sir Walter .
She exclaimed , however , with a very tolerable imitation of nature : -- '' Oh !
dear !
very true .
Only think , Miss Elliot , to my great surprise I met with Mr Elliot in Bath Street .
I was never more astonished .
He turned back and walked with me to the Pump Yard .
He had been prevented setting off for Thornberry , but I really forget by what ; for I was in a hurry , and could not much attend , and I can only answer for his being determined not to be delayed in his return .
He wanted to know how early he might be admitted to-morrow .
He was full of ` to-morrow , ' and it is very evident that I have been full of it too , ever since I entered the house , and learnt the extension of your plan and all that had happened , or my seeing him could never have gone so entirely out of my head . ''
Chapter 23 One day only had passed since Anne 's conversation with Mrs Smith ; but a keener interest had succeeded , and she was now so little touched by Mr Elliot 's conduct , except by its effects in one quarter , that it became a matter of course the next morning , still to defer her explanatory visit in Rivers Street .
She had promised to be with the Musgroves from breakfast to dinner .
Her faith was plighted , and Mr Elliot 's character , like the Sultaness Scheherazade 's head , must live another day .
She could not keep her appointment punctually , however ; the weather was unfavourable , and she had grieved over the rain on her friends ' account , and felt it very much on her own , before she was able to attempt the walk .
When she reached the White Hart , and made her way to the proper apartment , she found herself neither arriving quite in time , nor the first to arrive .
The party before her were , Mrs Musgrove , talking to Mrs Croft , and Captain Harville to Captain Wentworth ; and she immediately heard that Mary and Henrietta , too impatient to wait , had gone out the moment it had cleared , but would be back again soon , and that the strictest injunctions had been left with Mrs Musgrove to keep her there till they returned .
She had only to submit , sit down , be outwardly composed , and feel herself plunged at once in all the agitations which she had merely laid her account of tasting a little before the morning closed .
There was no delay , no waste of time .
She was deep in the happiness of such misery , or the misery of such happiness , instantly .
Two minutes after her entering the room , Captain Wentworth said -- '' We will write the letter we were talking of , Harville , now , if you will give me materials . ''
Materials were at hand , on a separate table ; he went to it , and nearly turning his back to them all , was engrossed by writing .
Mrs Musgrove was giving Mrs Croft the history of her eldest daughter 's engagement , and just in that inconvenient tone of voice which was perfectly audible while it pretended to be a whisper .
Anne felt that she did not belong to the conversation , and yet , as Captain Harville seemed thoughtful and not disposed to talk , she could not avoid hearing many undesirable particulars ; such as , '' how Mr Musgrove and my brother Hayter had met again and again to talk it over ; what my brother Hayter had said one day , and what Mr Musgrove had proposed the next , and what had occurred to my sister Hayter , and what the young people had wished , and what I said at first I never could consent to , but was afterwards persuaded to think might do very well , '' and a great deal in the same style of open-hearted communication : minutiae which , even with every advantage of taste and delicacy , which good Mrs Musgrove could not give , could be properly interesting only to the principals .
Mrs Croft was attending with great good-humour , and whenever she spoke at all , it was very sensibly .
Anne hoped the gentlemen might each be too much self-occupied to hear .
`` And so , ma'am , all these thing considered , '' said Mrs Musgrove , in her powerful whisper , `` though we could have wished it different , yet , altogether , we did not think it fair to stand out any longer , for Charles Hayter was quite wild about it , and Henrietta was pretty near as bad ; and so we thought they had better marry at once , and make the best of it , as many others have done before them .
At any rate , said I , it will be better than a long engagement . ''
`` That is precisely what I was going to observe , '' cried Mrs Croft .
`` I would rather have young people settle on a small income at once , and have to struggle with a few difficulties together , than be involved in a long engagement .
I always think that no mutual -- '' '' Oh !
dear Mrs Croft , '' cried Mrs Musgrove , unable to let her finish her speech , `` there is nothing I so abominate for young people as a long engagement .
It is what I always protested against for my children .
It is all very well , I used to say , for young people to be engaged , if there is a certainty of their being able to marry in six months , or even in twelve ; but a long engagement -- '' '' Yes , dear ma'am , '' said Mrs Croft , `` or an uncertain engagement , an engagement which may be long .
To begin without knowing that at such a time there will be the means of marrying , I hold to be very unsafe and unwise , and what I think all parents should prevent as far as they can . ''
Anne found an unexpected interest here .
She felt its application to herself , felt it in a nervous thrill all over her ; and at the same moment that her eyes instinctively glanced towards the distant table , Captain Wentworth 's pen ceased to move , his head was raised , pausing , listening , and he turned round the next instant to give a look , one quick , conscious look at her .
The two ladies continued to talk , to re-urge the same admitted truths , and enforce them with such examples of the ill effect of a contrary practice as had fallen within their observation , but Anne heard nothing distinctly ; it was only a buzz of words in her ear , her mind was in confusion .
Captain Harville , who had in truth been hearing none of it , now left his seat , and moved to a window , and Anne seeming to watch him , though it was from thorough absence of mind , became gradually sensible that he was inviting her to join him where he stood .
He looked at her with a smile , and a little motion of the head , which expressed , '' Come to me , I have something to say ; '' and the unaffected , easy kindness of manner which denoted the feelings of an older acquaintance than he really was , strongly enforced the invitation .
She roused herself and went to him .
The window at which he stood was at the other end of the room from where the two ladies were sitting , and though nearer to Captain Wentworth 's table , not very near .
As she joined him , Captain Harville 's countenance re-assumed the serious , thoughtful expression which seemed its natural character .
`` Look here , '' said he , unfolding a parcel in his hand , and displaying a small miniature painting , `` do you know who that is ? ''
`` Certainly : Captain Benwick . ''
`` Yes , and you may guess who it is for .
But , '' ( in a deep tone , ) '' it was not done for her .
Miss Elliot , do you remember our walking together at Lyme , and grieving for him ?
I little thought then -- but no matter .
This was drawn at the Cape .
He met with a clever young German artist at the Cape , and in compliance with a promise to my poor sister , sat to him , and was bringing it home for her ; and I have now the charge of getting it properly set for another !
It was a commission to me !
But who else was there to employ ?
I hope I can allow for him .
I am not sorry , indeed , to make it over to another .
He undertakes it ; '' ( looking towards Captain Wentworth , ) '' he is writing about it now . ''
And with a quivering lip he wound up the whole by adding , `` Poor Fanny !
she would not have forgotten him so soon ! ''
`` No , '' replied Anne , in a low , feeling voice .
`` That I can easily believe . ''
`` It was not in her nature .
She doted on him . ''
`` It would not be the nature of any woman who truly loved . ''
Captain Harville smiled , as much as to say , `` Do you claim that for your sex ? ''
and she answered the question , smiling also , '' Yes .
We certainly do not forget you as soon as you forget us .
It is , perhaps , our fate rather than our merit .
We can not help ourselves .
We live at home , quiet , confined , and our feelings prey upon us .
You are forced on exertion .
You have always a profession , pursuits , business of some sort or other , to take you back into the world immediately , and continual occupation and change soon weaken impressions . ''
`` Granting your assertion that the world does all this so soon for men ( which , however , I do not think I shall grant ) , it does not apply to Benwick .
He has not been forced upon any exertion .
The peace turned him on shore at the very moment , and he has been living with us , in our little family circle , ever since . ''
`` True , '' said Anne , `` very true ; I did not recollect ; but what shall we say now , Captain Harville ?
If the change be not from outward circumstances , it must be from within ; it must be nature , man 's nature , which has done the business for Captain Benwick . ''
`` No , no , it is not man 's nature .
I will not allow it to be more man 's nature than woman 's to be inconstant and forget those they do love , or have loved .
I believe the reverse .
I believe in a true analogy between our bodily frames and our mental ; and that as our bodies are the strongest , so are our feelings ; capable of bearing most rough usage , and riding out the heaviest weather . ''
`` Your feelings may be the strongest , '' replied Anne , `` but the same spirit of analogy will authorise me to assert that ours are the most tender .
Man is more robust than woman , but he is not longer lived ; which exactly explains my view of the nature of their attachments .
Nay , it would be too hard upon you , if it were otherwise .
You have difficulties , and privations , and dangers enough to struggle with .
You are always labouring and toiling , exposed to every risk and hardship .
Your home , country , friends , all quitted .
Neither time , nor health , nor life , to be called your own .
It would be hard , indeed '' ( with a faltering voice ) , `` if woman 's feelings were to be added to all this . ''
`` We shall never agree upon this question , '' Captain Harville was beginning to say , when a slight noise called their attention to Captain Wentworth 's hitherto perfectly quiet division of the room .
It was nothing more than that his pen had fallen down ; but Anne was startled at finding him nearer than she had supposed , and half inclined to suspect that the pen had only fallen because he had been occupied by them , striving to catch sounds , which yet she did not think he could have caught .
`` Have you finished your letter ? ''
said Captain Harville .
`` Not quite , a few lines more .
I shall have done in five minutes . ''
`` There is no hurry on my side .
I am only ready whenever you are .
I am in very good anchorage here , '' ( smiling at Anne , ) `` well supplied , and want for nothing .
No hurry for a signal at all .
Well , Miss Elliot , '' ( lowering his voice , ) `` as I was saying we shall never agree , I suppose , upon this point .
No man and woman , would , probably .
But let me observe that all histories are against you -- all stories , prose and verse .
If I had such a memory as Benwick , I could bring you fifty quotations in a moment on my side the argument , and I do not think I ever opened a book in my life which had not something to say upon woman 's inconstancy .
Songs and proverbs , all talk of woman 's fickleness .
But perhaps you will say , these were all written by men . ''
`` Perhaps I shall .
Yes , yes , if you please , no reference to examples in books .
Men have had every advantage of us in telling their own story .
Education has been theirs in so much higher a degree ; the pen has been in their hands .
I will not allow books to prove anything . ''
`` But how shall we prove anything ? ''
`` We never shall .
We never can expect to prove any thing upon such a point .
It is a difference of opinion which does not admit of proof .
We each begin , probably , with a little bias towards our own sex ; and upon that bias build every circumstance in favour of it which has occurred within our own circle ; many of which circumstances ( perhaps those very cases which strike us the most ) may be precisely such as can not be brought forward without betraying a confidence , or in some respect saying what should not be said . ''
`` Ah ! ''
cried Captain Harville , in a tone of strong feeling , '' if I could but make you comprehend what a man suffers when he takes a last look at his wife and children , and watches the boat that he has sent them off in , as long as it is in sight , and then turns away and says , ` God knows whether we ever meet again ! '
And then , if I could convey to you the glow of his soul when he does see them again ; when , coming back after a twelvemonth 's absence , perhaps , and obliged to put into another port , he calculates how soon it be possible to get them there , pretending to deceive himself , and saying , ` They can not be here till such a day , ' but all the while hoping for them twelve hours sooner , and seeing them arrive at last , as if Heaven had given them wings , by many hours sooner still !
If I could explain to you all this , and all that a man can bear and do , and glories to do , for the sake of these treasures of his existence !
I speak , you know , only of such men as have hearts ! ''
pressing his own with emotion .
`` Oh ! ''
cried Anne eagerly , `` I hope I do justice to all that is felt by you , and by those who resemble you .
God forbid that I should undervalue the warm and faithful feelings of any of my fellow-creatures !
I should deserve utter contempt if I dared to suppose that true attachment and constancy were known only by woman .
No , I believe you capable of everything great and good in your married lives .
I believe you equal to every important exertion , and to every domestic forbearance , so long as -- if I may be allowed the expression -- so long as you have an object .
I mean while the woman you love lives , and lives for you .
All the privilege I claim for my own sex ( it is not a very enviable one ; you need not covet it ) , is that of loving longest , when existence or when hope is gone . ''
She could not immediately have uttered another sentence ; her heart was too full , her breath too much oppressed .
`` You are a good soul , '' cried Captain Harville , putting his hand on her arm , quite affectionately .
`` There is no quarrelling with you .
And when I think of Benwick , my tongue is tied . ''
Their attention was called towards the others .
Mrs Croft was taking leave .
`` Here , Frederick , you and I part company , I believe , '' said she .
`` I am going home , and you have an engagement with your friend .
To-night we may have the pleasure of all meeting again at your party , '' ( turning to Anne . )
`` We had your sister 's card yesterday , and I understood Frederick had a card too , though I did not see it ; and you are disengaged , Frederick , are you not , as well as ourselves ? ''
Captain Wentworth was folding up a letter in great haste , and either could not or would not answer fully .
`` Yes , '' said he , `` very true ; here we separate , but Harville and I shall soon be after you ; that is , Harville , if you are ready , I am in half a minute .
I know you will not be sorry to be off .
I shall be at your service in half a minute . ''
Mrs Croft left them , and Captain Wentworth , having sealed his letter with great rapidity , was indeed ready , and had even a hurried , agitated air , which shewed impatience to be gone .
Anne knew not how to understand it .
She had the kindest `` Good morning , God bless you ! ''
from Captain Harville , but from him not a word , nor a look !
He had passed out of the room without a look !
She had only time , however , to move closer to the table where he had been writing , when footsteps were heard returning ; the door opened , it was himself .
He begged their pardon , but he had forgotten his gloves , and instantly crossing the room to the writing table , he drew out a letter from under the scattered paper , placed it before Anne with eyes of glowing entreaty fixed on her for a time , and hastily collecting his gloves , was again out of the room , almost before Mrs Musgrove was aware of his being in it : the work of an instant !
The revolution which one instant had made in Anne , was almost beyond expression .
The letter , with a direction hardly legible , to `` Miss A .
E. -- , '' was evidently the one which he had been folding so hastily .
While supposed to be writing only to Captain Benwick , he had been also addressing her !
On the contents of that letter depended all which this world could do for her .
Anything was possible , anything might be defied rather than suspense .
Mrs Musgrove had little arrangements of her own at her own table ; to their protection she must trust , and sinking into the chair which he had occupied , succeeding to the very spot where he had leaned and written , her eyes devoured the following words : '' I can listen no longer in silence .
I must speak to you by such means as are within my reach .
You pierce my soul .
I am half agony , half hope .
Tell me not that I am too late , that such precious feelings are gone for ever .
I offer myself to you again with a heart even more your own than when you almost broke it , eight years and a half ago .
Dare not say that man forgets sooner than woman , that his love has an earlier death .
I have loved none but you .
Unjust I may have been , weak and resentful I have been , but never inconstant .
You alone have brought me to Bath .
For you alone , I think and plan .
Have you not seen this ?
Can you fail to have understood my wishes ?
I had not waited even these ten days , could I have read your feelings , as I think you must have penetrated mine .
I can hardly write .
I am every instant hearing something which overpowers me .
You sink your voice , but I can distinguish the tones of that voice when they would be lost on others .
Too good , too excellent creature !
You do us justice , indeed .
You do believe that there is true attachment and constancy among men .
Believe it to be most fervent , most undeviating , in F. W .
`` I must go , uncertain of my fate ; but I shall return hither , or follow your party , as soon as possible .
A word , a look , will be enough to decide whether I enter your father 's house this evening or never . ''
Such a letter was not to be soon recovered from .
Half and hour 's solitude and reflection might have tranquillized her ; but the ten minutes only which now passed before she was interrupted , with all the restraints of her situation , could do nothing towards tranquillity .
Every moment rather brought fresh agitation .
It was overpowering happiness .
And before she was beyond the first stage of full sensation , Charles , Mary , and Henrietta all came in .
The absolute necessity of seeming like herself produced then an immediate struggle ; but after a while she could do no more .
She began not to understand a word they said , and was obliged to plead indisposition and excuse herself .
They could then see that she looked very ill , were shocked and concerned , and would not stir without her for the world .
This was dreadful .
Would they only have gone away , and left her in the quiet possession of that room it would have been her cure ; but to have them all standing or waiting around her was distracting , and in desperation , she said she would go home .
`` By all means , my dear , '' cried Mrs Musgrove , `` go home directly , and take care of yourself , that you may be fit for the evening .
I wish Sarah was here to doctor you , but I am no doctor myself .
Charles , ring and order a chair .
She must not walk . ''
But the chair would never do .
Worse than all !
To lose the possibility of speaking two words to Captain Wentworth in the course of her quiet , solitary progress up the town ( and she felt almost certain of meeting him ) could not be borne .
The chair was earnestly protested against , and Mrs Musgrove , who thought only of one sort of illness , having assured herself with some anxiety , that there had been no fall in the case ; that Anne had not at any time lately slipped down , and got a blow on her head ; that she was perfectly convinced of having had no fall ; could part with her cheerfully , and depend on finding her better at night .
Anxious to omit no possible precaution , Anne struggled , and said -- '' I am afraid , ma'am , that it is not perfectly understood .
Pray be so good as to mention to the other gentlemen that we hope to see your whole party this evening .
I am afraid there had been some mistake ; and I wish you particularly to assure Captain Harville and Captain Wentworth , that we hope to see them both . ''
`` Oh !
my dear , it is quite understood , I give you my word .
Captain Harville has no thought but of going . ''
`` Do you think so ?
But I am afraid ; and I should be so very sorry .
Will you promise me to mention it , when you see them again ?
You will see them both this morning , I dare say .
Do promise me . ''
`` To be sure I will , if you wish it .
Charles , if you see Captain Harville anywhere , remember to give Miss Anne 's message .
But indeed , my dear , you need not be uneasy .
Captain Harville holds himself quite engaged , I 'll answer for it ; and Captain Wentworth the same , I dare say . ''
Anne could do no more ; but her heart prophesied some mischance to damp the perfection of her felicity .
It could not be very lasting , however .
Even if he did not come to Camden Place himself , it would be in her power to send an intelligible sentence by Captain Harville .
Another momentary vexation occurred .
Charles , in his real concern and good nature , would go home with her ; there was no preventing him .
This was almost cruel .
But she could not be long ungrateful ; he was sacrificing an engagement at a gunsmith 's , to be of use to her ; and she set off with him , with no feeling but gratitude apparent .
They were on Union Street , when a quicker step behind , a something of familiar sound , gave her two moments ' preparation for the sight of Captain Wentworth .
He joined them ; but , as if irresolute whether to join or to pass on , said nothing , only looked .
Anne could command herself enough to receive that look , and not repulsively .
The cheeks which had been pale now glowed , and the movements which had hesitated were decided .
He walked by her side .
Presently , struck by a sudden thought , Charles said -- '' Captain Wentworth , which way are you going ?
Only to Gay Street , or farther up the town ? ''
`` I hardly know , '' replied Captain Wentworth , surprised .
`` Are you going as high as Belmont ?
Are you going near Camden Place ?
Because , if you are , I shall have no scruple in asking you to take my place , and give Anne your arm to her father 's door .
She is rather done for this morning , and must not go so far without help , and I ought to be at that fellow 's in the Market Place .
He promised me the sight of a capital gun he is just going to send off ; said he would keep it unpacked to the last possible moment , that I might see it ; and if I do not turn back now , I have no chance .
By his description , a good deal like the second size double-barrel of mine , which you shot with one day round Winthrop . ''
There could not be an objection .
There could be only the most proper alacrity , a most obliging compliance for public view ; and smiles reined in and spirits dancing in private rapture .
In half a minute Charles was at the bottom of Union Street again , and the other two proceeding together : and soon words enough had passed between them to decide their direction towards the comparatively quiet and retired gravel walk , where the power of conversation would make the present hour a blessing indeed , and prepare it for all the immortality which the happiest recollections of their own future lives could bestow .
There they exchanged again those feelings and those promises which had once before seemed to secure everything , but which had been followed by so many , many years of division and estrangement .
There they returned again into the past , more exquisitely happy , perhaps , in their re-union , than when it had been first projected ; more tender , more tried , more fixed in a knowledge of each other 's character , truth , and attachment ; more equal to act , more justified in acting .
And there , as they slowly paced the gradual ascent , heedless of every group around them , seeing neither sauntering politicians , bustling housekeepers , flirting girls , nor nursery-maids and children , they could indulge in those retrospections and acknowledgements , and especially in those explanations of what had directly preceded the present moment , which were so poignant and so ceaseless in interest .
All the little variations of the last week were gone through ; and of yesterday and today there could scarcely be an end .
She had not mistaken him .
Jealousy of Mr Elliot had been the retarding weight , the doubt , the torment .
That had begun to operate in the very hour of first meeting her in Bath ; that had returned , after a short suspension , to ruin the concert ; and that had influenced him in everything he had said and done , or omitted to say and do , in the last four-and-twenty hours .
It had been gradually yielding to the better hopes which her looks , or words , or actions occasionally encouraged ; it had been vanquished at last by those sentiments and those tones which had reached him while she talked with Captain Harville ; and under the irresistible governance of which he had seized a sheet of paper , and poured out his feelings .
Of what he had then written , nothing was to be retracted or qualified .
He persisted in having loved none but her .
She had never been supplanted .
He never even believed himself to see her equal .
Thus much indeed he was obliged to acknowledge : that he had been constant unconsciously , nay unintentionally ; that he had meant to forget her , and believed it to be done .
He had imagined himself indifferent , when he had only been angry ; and he had been unjust to her merits , because he had been a sufferer from them .
Her character was now fixed on his mind as perfection itself , maintaining the loveliest medium of fortitude and gentleness ; but he was obliged to acknowledge that only at Uppercross had he learnt to do her justice , and only at Lyme had he begun to understand himself .
At Lyme , he had received lessons of more than one sort .
The passing admiration of Mr Elliot had at least roused him , and the scenes on the Cobb and at Captain Harville 's had fixed her superiority .
In his preceding attempts to attach himself to Louisa Musgrove ( the attempts of angry pride ) , he protested that he had for ever felt it to be impossible ; that he had not cared , could not care , for Louisa ; though till that day , till the leisure for reflection which followed it , he had not understood the perfect excellence of the mind with which Louisa 's could so ill bear a comparison , or the perfect unrivalled hold it possessed over his own .
There , he had learnt to distinguish between the steadiness of principle and the obstinacy of self-will , between the darings of heedlessness and the resolution of a collected mind .
There he had seen everything to exalt in his estimation the woman he had lost ; and there begun to deplore the pride , the folly , the madness of resentment , which had kept him from trying to regain her when thrown in his way .
From that period his penance had become severe .
He had no sooner been free from the horror and remorse attending the first few days of Louisa 's accident , no sooner begun to feel himself alive again , than he had begun to feel himself , though alive , not at liberty .
`` I found , '' said he , `` that I was considered by Harville an engaged man !
That neither Harville nor his wife entertained a doubt of our mutual attachment .
I was startled and shocked .
To a degree , I could contradict this instantly ; but , when I began to reflect that others might have felt the same -- her own family , nay , perhaps herself -- I was no longer at my own disposal .
I was hers in honour if she wished it .
I had been unguarded .
I had not thought seriously on this subject before .
I had not considered that my excessive intimacy must have its danger of ill consequence in many ways ; and that I had no right to be trying whether I could attach myself to either of the girls , at the risk of raising even an unpleasant report , were there no other ill effects .
I had been grossly wrong , and must abide the consequences . ''
He found too late , in short , that he had entangled himself ; and that precisely as he became fully satisfied of his not caring for Louisa at all , he must regard himself as bound to her , if her sentiments for him were what the Harvilles supposed .
It determined him to leave Lyme , and await her complete recovery elsewhere .
He would gladly weaken , by any fair means , whatever feelings or speculations concerning him might exist ; and he went , therefore , to his brother 's , meaning after a while to return to Kellynch , and act as circumstances might require .
`` I was six weeks with Edward , '' said he , `` and saw him happy .
I could have no other pleasure .
I deserved none .
He enquired after you very particularly ; asked even if you were personally altered , little suspecting that to my eye you could never alter . ''
Anne smiled , and let it pass .
It was too pleasing a blunder for a reproach .
It is something for a woman to be assured , in her eight-and-twentieth year , that she has not lost one charm of earlier youth ; but the value of such homage was inexpressibly increased to Anne , by comparing it with former words , and feeling it to be the result , not the cause of a revival of his warm attachment .
He had remained in Shropshire , lamenting the blindness of his own pride , and the blunders of his own calculations , till at once released from Louisa by the astonishing and felicitous intelligence of her engagement with Benwick .
`` Here , '' said he , `` ended the worst of my state ; for now I could at least put myself in the way of happiness ; I could exert myself ; I could do something .
But to be waiting so long in inaction , and waiting only for evil , had been dreadful .
Within the first five minutes I said , ` I will be at Bath on Wednesday , ' and I was .
Was it unpardonable to think it worth my while to come ?
and to arrive with some degree of hope ?
You were single .
It was possible that you might retain the feelings of the past , as I did ; and one encouragement happened to be mine .
I could never doubt that you would be loved and sought by others , but I knew to a certainty that you had refused one man , at least , of better pretensions than myself ; and I could not help often saying , ` Was this for me ? ' ''
Their first meeting in Milsom Street afforded much to be said , but the concert still more .
That evening seemed to be made up of exquisite moments .
The moment of her stepping forward in the Octagon Room to speak to him : the moment of Mr Elliot 's appearing and tearing her away , and one or two subsequent moments , marked by returning hope or increasing despondency , were dwelt on with energy .
`` To see you , '' cried he , `` in the midst of those who could not be my well-wishers ; to see your cousin close by you , conversing and smiling , and feel all the horrible eligibilities and proprieties of the match !
To consider it as the certain wish of every being who could hope to influence you !
Even if your own feelings were reluctant or indifferent , to consider what powerful supports would be his !
Was it not enough to make the fool of me which I appeared ?
How could I look on without agony ?
Was not the very sight of the friend who sat behind you , was not the recollection of what had been , the knowledge of her influence , the indelible , immoveable impression of what persuasion had once done -- was it not all against me ? ''
`` You should have distinguished , '' replied Anne .
`` You should not have suspected me now ; the case is so different , and my age is so different .
If I was wrong in yielding to persuasion once , remember that it was to persuasion exerted on the side of safety , not of risk .
When I yielded , I thought it was to duty , but no duty could be called in aid here .
In marrying a man indifferent to me , all risk would have been incurred , and all duty violated . ''
`` Perhaps I ought to have reasoned thus , '' he replied , `` but I could not .
I could not derive benefit from the late knowledge I had acquired of your character .
I could not bring it into play ; it was overwhelmed , buried , lost in those earlier feelings which I had been smarting under year after year .
I could think of you only as one who had yielded , who had given me up , who had been influenced by any one rather than by me .
I saw you with the very person who had guided you in that year of misery .
I had no reason to believe her of less authority now .
The force of habit was to be added . ''
`` I should have thought , '' said Anne , `` that my manner to yourself might have spared you much or all of this . ''
`` No , no !
your manner might be only the ease which your engagement to another man would give .
I left you in this belief ; and yet , I was determined to see you again .
My spirits rallied with the morning , and I felt that I had still a motive for remaining here . ''
At last Anne was at home again , and happier than any one in that house could have conceived .
All the surprise and suspense , and every other painful part of the morning dissipated by this conversation , she re-entered the house so happy as to be obliged to find an alloy in some momentary apprehensions of its being impossible to last .
An interval of meditation , serious and grateful , was the best corrective of everything dangerous in such high-wrought felicity ; and she went to her room , and grew steadfast and fearless in the thankfulness of her enjoyment .
The evening came , the drawing-rooms were lighted up , the company assembled .
It was but a card party , it was but a mixture of those who had never met before , and those who met too often ; a commonplace business , too numerous for intimacy , too small for variety ; but Anne had never found an evening shorter .
Glowing and lovely in sensibility and happiness , and more generally admired than she thought about or cared for , she had cheerful or forbearing feelings for every creature around her .
Mr Elliot was there ; she avoided , but she could pity him .
The Wallises , she had amusement in understanding them .
Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret -- they would soon be innoxious cousins to her .
She cared not for Mrs Clay , and had nothing to blush for in the public manners of her father and sister .
With the Musgroves , there was the happy chat of perfect ease ; with Captain Harville , the kind-hearted intercourse of brother and sister ; with Lady Russell , attempts at conversation , which a delicious consciousness cut short ; with Admiral and Mrs Croft , everything of peculiar cordiality and fervent interest , which the same consciousness sought to conceal ; and with Captain Wentworth , some moments of communications continually occurring , and always the hope of more , and always the knowledge of his being there .
It was in one of these short meetings , each apparently occupied in admiring a fine display of greenhouse plants , that she said -- '' I have been thinking over the past , and trying impartially to judge of the right and wrong , I mean with regard to myself ; and I must believe that I was right , much as I suffered from it , that I was perfectly right in being guided by the friend whom you will love better than you do now .
To me , she was in the place of a parent .
Do not mistake me , however .
I am not saying that she did not err in her advice .
It was , perhaps , one of those cases in which advice is good or bad only as the event decides ; and for myself , I certainly never should , in any circumstance of tolerable similarity , give such advice .
But I mean , that I was right in submitting to her , and that if I had done otherwise , I should have suffered more in continuing the engagement than I did even in giving it up , because I should have suffered in my conscience .
I have now , as far as such a sentiment is allowable in human nature , nothing to reproach myself with ; and if I mistake not , a strong sense of duty is no bad part of a woman 's portion . ''
He looked at her , looked at Lady Russell , and looking again at her , replied , as if in cool deliberation -- '' Not yet .
But there are hopes of her being forgiven in time .
I trust to being in charity with her soon .
But I too have been thinking over the past , and a question has suggested itself , whether there may not have been one person more my enemy even than that lady ?
My own self .
Tell me if , when I returned to England in the year eight , with a few thousand pounds , and was posted into the Laconia , if I had then written to you , would you have answered my letter ?
Would you , in short , have renewed the engagement then ? ''
`` Would I ! ''
was all her answer ; but the accent was decisive enough .
`` Good God ! ''
he cried , `` you would !
It is not that I did not think of it , or desire it , as what could alone crown all my other success ; but I was proud , too proud to ask again .
I did not understand you .
I shut my eyes , and would not understand you , or do you justice .
This is a recollection which ought to make me forgive every one sooner than myself .
Six years of separation and suffering might have been spared .
It is a sort of pain , too , which is new to me .
I have been used to the gratification of believing myself to earn every blessing that I enjoyed .
I have valued myself on honourable toils and just rewards .
Like other great men under reverses , '' he added , with a smile .
`` I must endeavour to subdue my mind to my fortune .
I must learn to brook being happier than I deserve . ''
Chapter 24 Who can be in doubt of what followed ?
When any two young people take it into their heads to marry , they are pretty sure by perseverance to carry their point , be they ever so poor , or ever so imprudent , or ever so little likely to be necessary to each other 's ultimate comfort .
This may be bad morality to conclude with , but I believe it to be truth ; and if such parties succeed , how should a Captain Wentworth and an Anne Elliot , with the advantage of maturity of mind , consciousness of right , and one independent fortune between them , fail of bearing down every opposition ?
They might in fact , have borne down a great deal more than they met with , for there was little to distress them beyond the want of graciousness and warmth .
Sir Walter made no objection , and Elizabeth did nothing worse than look cold and unconcerned .
Captain Wentworth , with five-and-twenty thousand pounds , and as high in his profession as merit and activity could place him , was no longer nobody .
He was now esteemed quite worthy to address the daughter of a foolish , spendthrift baronet , who had not had principle or sense enough to maintain himself in the situation in which Providence had placed him , and who could give his daughter at present but a small part of the share of ten thousand pounds which must be hers hereafter .
Sir Walter , indeed , though he had no affection for Anne , and no vanity flattered , to make him really happy on the occasion , was very far from thinking it a bad match for her .
On the contrary , when he saw more of Captain Wentworth , saw him repeatedly by daylight , and eyed him well , he was very much struck by his personal claims , and felt that his superiority of appearance might be not unfairly balanced against her superiority of rank ; and all this , assisted by his well-sounding name , enabled Sir Walter at last to prepare his pen , with a very good grace , for the insertion of the marriage in the volume of honour .
The only one among them , whose opposition of feeling could excite any serious anxiety was Lady Russell .
Anne knew that Lady Russell must be suffering some pain in understanding and relinquishing Mr Elliot , and be making some struggles to become truly acquainted with , and do justice to Captain Wentworth .
This however was what Lady Russell had now to do .
She must learn to feel that she had been mistaken with regard to both ; that she had been unfairly influenced by appearances in each ; that because Captain Wentworth 's manners had not suited her own ideas , she had been too quick in suspecting them to indicate a character of dangerous impetuosity ; and that because Mr Elliot 's manners had precisely pleased her in their propriety and correctness , their general politeness and suavity , she had been too quick in receiving them as the certain result of the most correct opinions and well-regulated mind .
There was nothing less for Lady Russell to do , than to admit that she had been pretty completely wrong , and to take up a new set of opinions and of hopes .
There is a quickness of perception in some , a nicety in the discernment of character , a natural penetration , in short , which no experience in others can equal , and Lady Russell had been less gifted in this part of understanding than her young friend .
But she was a very good woman , and if her second object was to be sensible and well-judging , her first was to see Anne happy .
She loved Anne better than she loved her own abilities ; and when the awkwardness of the beginning was over , found little hardship in attaching herself as a mother to the man who was securing the happiness of her other child .
Of all the family , Mary was probably the one most immediately gratified by the circumstance .
It was creditable to have a sister married , and she might flatter herself with having been greatly instrumental to the connexion , by keeping Anne with her in the autumn ; and as her own sister must be better than her husband 's sisters , it was very agreeable that Captain Wentworth should be a richer man than either Captain Benwick or Charles Hayter .
She had something to suffer , perhaps , when they came into contact again , in seeing Anne restored to the rights of seniority , and the mistress of a very pretty landaulette ; but she had a future to look forward to , of powerful consolation .
Anne had no Uppercross Hall before her , no landed estate , no headship of a family ; and if they could but keep Captain Wentworth from being made a baronet , she would not change situations with Anne .
It would be well for the eldest sister if she were equally satisfied with her situation , for a change is not very probable there .
She had soon the mortification of seeing Mr Elliot withdraw , and no one of proper condition has since presented himself to raise even the unfounded hopes which sunk with him .
The news of his cousins Anne 's engagement burst on Mr Elliot most unexpectedly .
It deranged his best plan of domestic happiness , his best hope of keeping Sir Walter single by the watchfulness which a son-in-law 's rights would have given .
But , though discomfited and disappointed , he could still do something for his own interest and his own enjoyment .
He soon quitted Bath ; and on Mrs Clay's quitting it soon afterwards , and being next heard of as established under his protection in London , it was evident how double a game he had been playing , and how determined he was to save himself from being cut out by one artful woman , at least .
Mrs Clay 's affections had overpowered her interest , and she had sacrificed , for the young man 's sake , the possibility of scheming longer for Sir Walter .
She has abilities , however , as well as affections ; and it is now a doubtful point whether his cunning , or hers , may finally carry the day ; whether , after preventing her from being the wife of Sir Walter , he may not be wheedled and caressed at last into making her the wife of Sir William .
It can not be doubted that Sir Walter and Elizabeth were shocked and mortified by the loss of their companion , and the discovery of their deception in her .
They had their great cousins , to be sure , to resort to for comfort ; but they must long feel that to flatter and follow others , without being flattered and followed in turn , is but a state of half enjoyment .
Anne , satisfied at a very early period of Lady Russell 's meaning to love Captain Wentworth as she ought , had no other alloy to the happiness of her prospects than what arose from the consciousness of having no relations to bestow on him which a man of sense could value .
There she felt her own inferiority very keenly .
The disproportion in their fortune was nothing ; it did not give her a moment 's regret ; but to have no family to receive and estimate him properly , nothing of respectability , of harmony , of good will to offer in return for all the worth and all the prompt welcome which met her in his brothers and sisters , was a source of as lively pain as her mind could well be sensible of under circumstances of otherwise strong felicity .
She had but two friends in the world to add to his list , Lady Russell and Mrs Smith .
To those , however , he was very well disposed to attach himself .
Lady Russell , in spite of all her former transgressions , he could now value from his heart .
While he was not obliged to say that he believed her to have been right in originally dividing them , he was ready to say almost everything else in her favour , and as for Mrs Smith , she had claims of various kinds to recommend her quickly and permanently .
Her recent good offices by Anne had been enough in themselves , and their marriage , instead of depriving her of one friend , secured her two .
She was their earliest visitor in their settled life ; and Captain Wentworth , by putting her in the way of recovering her husband 's property in the West Indies , by writing for her , acting for her , and seeing her through all the petty difficulties of the case with the activity and exertion of a fearless man and a determined friend , fully requited the services which she had rendered , or ever meant to render , to his wife .
Mrs Smith 's enjoyments were not spoiled by this improvement of income , with some improvement of health , and the acquisition of such friends to be often with , for her cheerfulness and mental alacrity did not fail her ; and while these prime supplies of good remained , she might have bid defiance even to greater accessions of worldly prosperity .
She might have been absolutely rich and perfectly healthy , and yet be happy .
Her spring of felicity was in the glow of her spirits , as her friend Anne 's was in the warmth of her heart .
Anne was tenderness itself , and she had the full worth of it in Captain Wentworth 's affection .
His profession was all that could ever make her friends wish that tenderness less , the dread of a future war all that could dim her sunshine .
She gloried in being a sailor 's wife , but she must pay the tax of quick alarm for belonging to that profession which is , if possible , more distinguished in its domestic virtues than in its national importance .
Finis

[ The Parent 's Assistant , by Maria Edgeworth ] THE ORPHANS .
Near the ruins of the castle of Rossmore , in Ireland , is a small cabin , in which there once lived a widow and her four children .
As long as she was able to work , she was very industrious , and was accounted the best spinner in the parish ; but she overworked herself at last , and fell ill , so that she could not sit to her wheel as she used to do , and was obliged to give it up to her eldest daughter , Mary .
Mary was at this time about twelve years old .
One evening she was sitting at the foot of her mother 's bed spinning , and her little brothers and sisters were gathered round the fire eating their potatoes and milk for supper .
`` Bless them , the poor young creatures ! ''
said the widow , who , as she lay on her bed , which she knew must be her deathbed , was thinking of what would become of her children after she was gone .
Mary stopped her wheel , for she was afraid that the noise of it had wakened her mother , and would hinder her from going to sleep again .
`` No need to stop the wheel , Mary , dear , for me , '' said her mother , `` I was not asleep ; nor is it THAT which keeps me from sleep .
But do n't overwork yourself , Mary . ''
`` Oh , no fear of that , '' replied Mary ; `` I 'm strong and hearty . ''
`` So was I once , '' said her mother .
`` And so you will be again , I hope , '' said Mary , `` when the fine weather comes again . ''
`` The fine weather will never come again to me , '' said her mother .
`` 'T is a folly , Mary , to hope for that ; but what I hope is , that you 'll find some friend -- some help -- orphans as you 'll soon all of you be .
And one thing comforts my heart , even as I AM lying here , that not a soul in the wide world I am leaving has to complain of me .
Though poor I have lived honest , and I have brought you up to be the same , Mary ; and I am sure the little ones will take after you ; for you 'll be good to them -- as good to them as you can . ''
Here the children , who had finished eating their suppers , came round the bed , to listen to what their mother was saying .
She was tired of speaking , for she was very weak ; but she took their little hands , as they laid them on the bed and joining them all together , she said , `` Bless you , dears ; bless you ; love and help one another all you can .
Good night ! -- good-bye ! ''
Mary took the children away to their bed , for she saw that their mother was too ill to say more ; but Mary did not herself know how ill she was .
Her mother never spoke rightly afterwards , but talked in a confused way about some debts , and one in particular , which she owed to a schoolmistress for Mary 's schooling ; and then she charged Mary to go and pay it , because she was not able to GO IN with it .
At the end of the week she was dead and buried , and the orphans were left alone in their cabin .
The two youngest girls , Peggy and Nancy , were six and seven years old .
Edmund was not yet nine , but he was a stout-grown , healthy boy , and well disposed to work .
He had been used to bring home turf from the bog on his back , to lead cart-horses , and often to go on errands for gentlemen's families , who paid him a sixpence or a shilling , according to the distance which he went , so that Edmund , by some or other of these little employments , was , as he said , likely enough to earn his bread ; and he told Mary to have a good heart , for that he should every year grow able to do more and more , and that he should never forget his mother 's words when she last gave him her blessing , and joined their hands all together .
As for Peggy and Nancy , it was little that they could do ; but they were good children , and Mary , when she considered that so much depended upon her , was resolved to exert herself to the utmost .
Her first care was to pay those debts which her mother had mentioned to her , for which she left money done up carefully in separate papers .
When all these were paid away , there was not enough left to pay both the rent of the cabin and a year 's schooling for herself and sisters which was due to the schoolmistress in a neighbouring village .
Mary was in hopes that the rent would not be called for immediately , but in this she was disappointed .
Mr .
Harvey , the gentleman on whose estate she lived , was in England , and , in his absence , all was managed by a Mr .
Hopkins , an agent , who was a HARD MAN .
* The driver came to Mary about a week after her mother 's death , and told her that the rent must be brought in the next day , and that she must leave the cabin , for a new tenant was coming into it ; that she was too young to have a house to herself , and that the only thing she had to do was to get some neighbour to take her and her brother and her sisters in for charity 's sake .
* A hard-hearted man .
The driver finished by hinting that she would not be so hardly used if she had not brought upon herself the ill-will of Miss Alice , the agent's daughter .
Mary , it is true , had refused to give Miss Alice a goat upon which she had set her fancy ; but this was the only offence of which she had been guilty , and at the time she refused it her mother wanted the goat 's milk , which was the only thing she then liked to drink .
Mary went immediately to Mr .
Hopkins , the agent , to pay her rent ; and she begged of him to let her stay another year in her cabin ; but this he refused .
It was now September 25th , and he said that the new tenant must come in on the 29th , so that she must quit it directly .
Mary could not bear the thoughts of begging any of the neighbours to take her and her brother and sisters in FOR CHARITY 'S SAKE ; for the neighbours were all poor enough themselves .
So she bethought herself that she might find shelter in the ruins of the old castle of Rossmore where she and her brother , in better times , had often played at hide and seek .
The kitchen and two other rooms near it were yet covered in tolerably well ; and a little thatch , she thought , would make them comfortable through the winter .
The agent consented to let her and her brother and sisters go in there , upon her paying him half a guinea in hand , and promising to pay the same yearly .
Into these lodgings the orphans now removed , taking with them two bedsteads , a stool , chair and a table , a sort of press , which contained what little clothes they had , and a chest in which they had two hundred of meal .
The chest was carried for them by some of the charitable neighbours , who likewise added to their scanty stock of potatoes and turf what would make it last through the winter .
These children were well thought of and pitied , because their mother was known to have been all her life honest and industrious .
`` Sure , '' says one of the neighbours , `` we can do no less than give a helping hand to the poor orphans , that are so ready to help themselves . ''
So one helped to thatch the room in which they were to sleep , and another took their cow to graze upon his bit of land on condition of having half the milk ; and one and all said they should be welcome to take share of their potatoes and buttermilk if they should find their own ever fall short .
The half-guinea which Mr .
Hopkins , the agent , required for letting Mary into the castle , was part of what she had to pay to the schoolmistress , to whom above a guinea was due .
Mary went to her , and took her goat along with her , and offered it in part of payment of the debt , but the schoolmistress would not receive the goat .
She said that she could afford to wait for her money till Mary was able to pay it ; that she knew her to be an honest , industrious little girl , and she would trust her with more than a guinea .
Mary thanked her ; and she was glad to take the goat home again , as she was very fond of it .
Being now settled in their house , they went every day regularly to work ; Maud spun nine cuts a day , besides doing all that was to be done in the house ; Edmund got fourpence a day by his work ; and Peggy and Annie earned twopence apiece at the paper-mills near Navan , where they were employed to sort rags , and to cut them into small pieces .
When they had done work one day , Annie went to the master of the paper- mill and asked him if she might have two sheets of large white paper which were lying on the press .
She offered a penny for the paper ; but the master would not take anything from her , but gave her the paper when he found that she wanted it to make a garland for her mother 's grave .
Annie and Peggy cut out the garland , and Mary , when it was finished , went along with them and Edmund to put it up .
It was just a month after their mother 's death .
It happened , at the time the orphans were putting up this garland , that two young ladies , who were returning home after their evening walk , stopped at the gate of the churchyard to look at the red light which the setting sun cast upon the window of the church .
As the ladies were standing at the gate , they heard a voice near them crying , `` O , mother !
mother !
are you gone for ever ? ''
They could not see anyone , so they walked softly round to the other side of the church , and there they saw Mary kneeling beside a grave , on which her brothers and sisters were hanging their white garlands .
The children all stood still when they saw the two ladies passing near them ; but Mary did not know anybody was passing , for her face was hid in her hands .
Isabella and Caroline ( so these ladies were called ) would not disturb the poor children ; but they stopped in the village to inquire about them .
It was at the house of the schoolmistress that they stopped , and she gave them a good account of these orphans .
She particularly commended Mary's honesty , in having immediately paid all her mother 's debts to the utmost farthing , as far as her money would go .
She told the ladies how Mary had been turned out of her house , and how she had offered her goat , of which she was very fond , to discharge a debt due for her schooling ; and , in short , the schoolmistress , who had known Mary for several years , spoke so well of her that these ladies resolved that they would go to the old castle of Rossmore to see her the next day .
When they went there , they found the room in which the children lived as clean and neat as such a ruined place could be made .
Edmund was out working with a farmer , Mary was spinning , and her little sisters were measuring out some bogberries , of which they had gathered a basketful , for sale .
Isabella , after telling Mary what an excellent character she had heard of her , inquired what it was she most wanted ; and Mary said that she had just worked up all her flax , and she was most in want of more flax for her wheel .
Isabella promised that she would send her a fresh supply of flax , and Caroline bought the bogberries from the little girls , and gave them money enough to buy a pound of coarse cotton for knitting , as Mary said that she could teach them how to knit .
The supply of flax , which Isabella sent the next day , was of great service to Mary , as it kept her in employment for above a month ; and when she sold the yarn which she had spun with it , she had money enough to buy some warm flannel for winter wear .
Besides spinning well , she had learned at school to do plain work tolerably neatly , and Isabella and Caroline employed her to work for them ; by which she earned a great deal more than she could by spinning .
At her leisure hours she taught her sisters to read and write ; and Edmund , with part of the money which he earned by his work out of doors , paid a schoolmaster for teaching him a little arithmetic .
When the winter nights came on , he used to light his rush candles for Mary to work by .
He had gathered and stripped a good provision of rushes in the month of August , and a neighbour gave him grease to dip them in .
One evening , just as he had lighted his candles , a footman came in , who was sent by Isabella with some plain work to Mary .
This servant was an Englishman , and he was but newly come over to Ireland .
The rush candles caught his attention ; for he had never seen any of them before , as he came from a part of England where they were not used .
Edmund , who was ready to oblige , and proud that his candles were noticed showed the Englishman how they were made , and gave him a bundle of rushes .
* [ * '' The proper species of rush , '' says White , in his 'Natural History of Selborne , ' `` seems to be the Juncus effusus , or common soft rush , which is to be found in moist pastures , by the sides of streams , and under hedges .
These rushes are in best condition in the height of summer , but may be gathered so as to serve the purpose well quite on to autumn .
The largest and longest are the best .
Decayed labourers , women , and children make it their business to procure and prepare them .
As soon as they are cut , they must be flung into water , and kept there ; for otherwise they will dry and shrink , and the peel will not run .
When these junci are thus far prepared , they must lie out on the grass to be bleached and take the dew for some nights , and afterwards be dried in the sun .
Some address is required in dipping these rushes in the scalding fat or grease ; but this knack is also to be attained by practice .
A pound of common grease may be procured for fourpence , and about six pounds of grease will dip a pound of rushes and one pound of rushes may be bought for one shilling ; so that a pound of rushes , medicated and ready for use , will cost three shillings . '' ]
The servant was pleased with his good nature in this trifling instance , and remembered it long after it was forgotten by Edmund .
Whenever his master wanted to send a messenger anywhere , Gilbert ( for that was the servant 's name ) always employed his little friend Edmund , whom , upon further acquaintance , he liked better and better .
He found that Edmund was both quick and exact in executing commissions .
One day , after he had waited a great while at a gentleman 's house for an answer to a letter , he was so impatient to get home that he ran off without it .
When he was questioned by Gilbert why he did not bring an answer , he did not attempt to make any excuse ; he did not say , `` There was no answer , please your honour , '' or , `` They bid me not to wait , '' etc .
; but he told exactly the truth ; and though Gilbert scolded him for being so impatient as not to wait , yet his telling the truth was more to the boy's advantage than any excuse he could have made .
After this he was always believed when he said , `` There was no answer , '' or , `` They bid me not wait '' ; for Gilbert knew that he would not tell a lie to save himself from being scolded .
The orphans continued to assist one another in their work according to their strength and abilities ; and they went on in this manner for three years .
With what Mary got by her spinning and plain work , and Edmund by leading of cart-horses , going on errands , etc. , and with little Peggy and Anne 's earnings , the family contrived to live comfortably .
Isabella and Caroline often visited them , and sometimes gave them clothes , and sometimes flax or cotton for their spinning and knitting ; and these children did not EXPECT , that because the ladies did something for them , they should do everything .
They did not grow idle or wasteful .
When Edmund was about twelve years old , his friend Gilbert sent for him one day , and told him that his master had given him leave to have a boy in the house to assist him , and that his master told him he might choose one in the neighbourhood .
Several were anxious to get into such a good place : but Gilbert said that he preferred Edmund before them all , because he knew him to be an industrious , honest , good natured lad , who always told the truth .
So Edmund went into service at the vicarage ; and his master was the father of Isabella and Caroline .
He found his new way of life very pleasant ; for he was well fed , well clothed , and well treated ; and he every day learned more of his business , in which at first he was rather awkward .
He was mindful to do all that Mr .
Gilbert required of him ; and he was so obliging to all his fellow-servants that they could not help liking him .
But there was one thing which was at first rather disagreeable to him : he was obliged to wear shoes and stockings , and they hurt his feet .
Besides this , when he waited at dinner he made such a noise in walking that his fellow-servants laughed at him .
He told his sister Mary of his distress , and she made for him , after many trials , a pair of cloth shoes , with soles of platted hemp .
* In these he could walk without making the least noise ; and as these shoes could not be worn out of doors , he was always sure to change them before he went out ; and consequently he had always clean shoes to wear in the house .
[ * The author has seen a pair of shoes , such as here described , made in a few hours . ]
It was soon remarked by the men-servants that he had left off clumping so heavily , and it was observed by the maids that he never dirtied the stairs or passages with his shoes .
When he was praised for these things , he said it was his sister Mary who should be thanked , and not he ; and he showed the shoes which she had made for him .
Isabella 's maid bespoke a pair immediately , and sent Mary a piece of pretty calico for the outside .
The last-maker made a last for her , and over this Mary sewed the calico vamps tight .
Her brother advised her to try platted packthread instead of hemp for the soles ; and she found that this looked more neat than the hemp soles , and was likely to last longer .
She platted the packthread together in strands of about half an inch thick , and these were served firmly together at the bottom of the shoe .
When they were finished they fitted well , and the maid showed them to her mistress .
Isabella and Caroline were so well pleased with Mary 's ingenuity and kindness to her brother , that they bespoke from her two dozen of these shoes , and gave her three yards of coloured fustian to make them of , and galloon for the binding .
When the shoes were completed , Isabella and Caroline disposed of them for her amongst their acquaintance , and got three shillings a pair for them .
The young ladies , as soon as they had collected the money , walked to the old castle , where they found everything neat and clean as usual .
They had great pleasure in giving to this industrious girl the reward of her ingenuity , which she received with some surprise and more gratitude .
They advised her to continue the shoemaking trade , as they found the shoes were liked , and they knew that they could have a sale for them at the Repository in Dublin .
Mary , encouraged by these kind friends , went on with her little manufacture with increased activity .
Peggy and Anne platted the packthread , and basted the vamps and linings together ready for her .
Edmund was allowed to come home for an hour every morning , provided he was back again before eight o'clock .
It was summer time , and he got up early , because he liked to go home to see his sisters , and he took his share in the manufactory .
It was his business to hammer the soles flat : and as soon as he came home every morning he performed his task with so much cheerfulness and sang so merrily at his work , that the hour of his arrival was always an hour of joy to the family .
Mary had presently employment enough upon her hands .
Orders came to her for shoes from many families in the neighbourhood , and she could not get them finished fast enough .
She , however , in the midst of her hurry , found time to make a very pretty pair , with neat roses , as a present for her schoolmistress , who , now that she saw her pupil in a good way of business , consented to receive the amount of her old debt .
Several of the children who went to her school were delighted with the sight of Mary 's present , and went to the little manufactory at Rossmore Castle , to find out how these shoes were made .
Some went from curiosity , others from idleness ; but when they saw how happy the little shoemakers seemed whilst busy at work , they longed to take some share in what was going forward .
One begged Mary to let her plat some packthread for the soles ; another helped Peggy and Anne to baste in the linings ; and all who could get employment were pleased , for the idle ones were shoved out of the way .
It became a custom with the children of the village to resort to the old castle at their play hours ; and it was surprising to see how much was done by ten or twelve of them , each doing but a little at a time .
One morning Edmund and the little manufacturers were assembled very early , and they were busy at their work , all sitting round the meal chest , which served them for a table .
`` My hands must be washed , '' said George , a little boy who came running in ; '' I ran so fast that I might be in time , to go to work along with you all , that I tumbled down , and look how I have dirtied my hands .
Most haste worst speed .
My hands must be washed before I can do anything . ''
Whilst George was washing his hands , two other little children , who had just finished their morning 's work , came to him to beg that he would blow some soap bubbles for them , and they were all three eagerly blowing bubbles , and watching them mount into the air , when suddenly they were startled by a noise as loud as thunder .
They were in a sort of outer court of the castle , next to the room in which all their companions were at work , and they ran precipitately into the room , exclaiming , `` Did you hear that noise ? ''
`` I thought I heard a clap of thunder , '' said Mary , `` but why do you look so frightened ? ''
As she finished speaking , another and a louder noise , and the walls round about them shook .
The children turned pale and stood motionless ; but Edmund threw down his hammer , and ran out to see what was the matter .
Mary followed him , and they saw that a great chimney of the old ruins at the farthest side of the castle had fallen down , and this was the cause of the prodigious noise .
The part of the castle in which they lived seemed , as Edmund said , to be perfectly safe ; but the children of the village were terrified , and thinking that the whole would come tumbling down directly , they ran to their homes as fast as they could .
Edmund , who was a courageous lad , and proud of showing his courage , laughed at their cowardice ; but Mary , who was very prudent , persuaded her brother to ask an experienced mason , who was building at his master 's , to come and give his opinion , whether their part of the castle was safe to live in or not .
The mason came , and gave it as his opinion that the rooms they inhabited might last through the winter but that no part of the ruins could stand another year .
Mary was sorry to leave a place of which she had grown fond , poor as it was , having lived in it in peace and contentment ever since her mother's death , which was now nearly four years ; but she determined to look out for some other place to live in ; and she had now money enough to pay the rent of a comfortable cabin .
Without losing any time , she went to the village that was at the end of the avenue leading to the vicarage , for she wished to get a lodging in this village because it was so near to her brother , and to the ladies who had been so kind to her .
She found that there was one newly built house in this village unoccupied ; it belonged to Mr .
Harvey , her landlord , who was still in England ; it was slated , and neatly fitted up inside ; but the rent of it was six guineas a year , and this was far above what Mary could afford to pay .
Three guineas a year she thought was the highest rent for which she could venture to engage .
Besides , she heard that several proposals had been made to Mr .
Harvey for this house , and she knew that Mr .
Hopkins , the agent , was not her friend ; therefore she despaired of getting it .
There was no other to be had in this village .
Her brother was still more vexed than she was , that she could not find a place near him .
He offered to give a guinea yearly towards the rent out of his wages ; and Mr .
Gilbert spoke about it for him to the steward , and inquired whether , amongst any of those who had given in proposals , there might not be one who would be content with a part of the house , and who would join with Mary in paying the rent .
None could be found but a woman , who was a great scold , and a man who was famous for going to law about every trifle with his neighbours .
Mary did not choose to have anything to do with these people .
She did not like to speak either to Miss Isabella or Caroline about it , because she was not of an encroaching temper ; and when they had done so much for her , she would have been ashamed to beg for more .
She returned home to the old castle , mortified that she had no good news to tell Anne and Peggy , who she knew expected to hear that she had found a nice house for them in the village near their brother .
`` Bad news for you , Peggy , '' cried she , as soon as she got home .
`` And bad news for you , Mary , '' replied her sisters , who looked very sorrowful .
`` What 's the matter ? ''
`` Your poor goat is dead , '' replied Peggy .
`` There she is , yonder , lying under the great corner stone ; you can just see her leg .
We can not lift the stone from off her , it is so heavy .
Betsy [ one of the neighbour's girls ] says she remembers , when she came to us to work early this morning , she saw the goat rubbing itself , and butting with its horns against that old tottering chimney . ''
`` Many 's the time , '' said Mary , `` that I have driven the poor thing away from that place ; I was always afraid she would shake that great ugly stone down upon her at last . ''
The goat , who had long been the favourite of Mary and her sisters , was lamented by them all .
When Edmund came , he helped them to move the great stone from off the poor animal , who was crushed so as to be a terrible sight .
As they were moving away this stone in order to bury the goat , Anne found an odd-looking piece of money , which seemed neither like a halfpenny , nor a shilling , nor a guinea .
`` Here are more , a great many more of them , '' cried Peggy ; and upon searching amongst the rubbish , they discovered a small iron pot , which seemed as if it had been filled with these coins , as a vast number of them were found about the spot where it fell .
On examining these coins , Edmund thought that several of them looked like gold , and the girls exclaimed with great joy -- '' Oh , Mary !
Mary !
this is come to us just in right time -- now you can pay for the slated house .
Never was anything so lucky ! ''
But Mary , though nothing could have pleased her better than to have been able to pay for the house , observed that they could not honestly touch any of this treasure , as it belonged to the owner of the castle .
Edmund agreed with her , that they ought to carry it all immediately to Mr .
Hopkins , the agent .
Peggy and Anne were convinced by what Mary said , and they begged to go along with her and their brother , to take the coins to Mr .
Hopkins .
On their way they stopped at the vicarage , to show the treasure to Mr .
Gilbert , who took it to the young ladies , Isabella and Caroline , and told them how it had been found .
It is not only by their superior riches , but it is yet more by their superior knowledge , that persons in the higher rank of life may assist those in a lower condition .
Isabella , who had some knowledge of chemistry , discovered , by touching the coins with nitric acid , that several of them were of gold , and consequently of great value .
Caroline also found out that many of the coins were very valuable as curiosities .
She recollected her father's having shown to her the prints of the coins at the end of each king's reign , in `` Rapin 's History of England ; '' and upon comparing these impressions with the coins found by the orphans , she perceived that many of them were of the reign of Henry the Seventh , which , from their scarcity , were highly appreciated by numismatic collectors .
Isabella and Caroline , knowing something of the character of Mr .
Hopkins , the agent , had the precaution to count the coins , and to mark each of them with a cross , so small that it was scarcely visible to the naked eye , though it was easily to be seen through a magnifying glass .
They also begged that their father , who was well acquainted with Mr .
Harvey , the gentleman to whom Rossmore Castle belonged , to write to him , and tell him how well these orphans had behaved about the treasure which they had found .
The value of the coins was estimated at about thirty or forty guineas .
A few days after the fall of the chimney at Rossmore Castle , as Mary and her sisters were sitting at their work , there came hobbling in an old woman , leaning on a crab stick , that seemed to have been newly cut .
She had a broken tobacco-pipe in her mouth ; her head was wrapped up in two large red and blue handkerchiefs , with their crooked corners hanging far down over the back of her neck , no shoes on her broad feet , nor stockings on her many-coloured legs .
Her petticoat was jagged at the bottom , and the skirt of her gown turned up over her shoulders , to serve instead of a cloak , which she had sold for whisky .
This old woman was well known amongst the country people by the name of Goody Grope : * because she had , for many years , been in the habit of groping in old castles , and in moats , * * and at the bottom of a round tower * * * in the neighbourhood , in search of treasure .
In her youth she had heard someone talking , in a whisper , of an old prophecy , found in a bog , which said that before many `` St .
Patrick 's days should come about , There would be found A treasure under ground , By one within twenty miles round . ''
This prophecy made a deep impression upon her .
She also dreamed of it three times : and as the dream , she thought , was a sure token that the prophecy was to come true , she , from that time forwards , gave up her spinning-wheel and her knitting , and could think of nothing but hunting for the treasure , that was to be found by one `` within twenty miles round . ''
[ * Goody is not a word used in Ireland .
Collyogh is the Irish appellation of an old woman : but as Collyogh might sound strangely to English ears , we have translated it by the word Goody .
* * What are in Ireland called moats , are , in England , called Danish mounds , or barrows .
* * * Near Kells , in Ireland , there is a round tower , which was in imminent danger of being pulled down by an old woman 's rooting at its foundation , in hopes of finding treasure . ]
Year after year St .
Patrick 's day came about , without her ever finding a farthing by all her groping ; and as she was always idle , she grew poorer and poorer .
Besides , to comfort herself for her disappointments , and to give her spirits for fresh searches , she took to drinking .
She sold all she had by degrees ; but still she fancied that the lucky day would come sooner or later , THAT WOULD PAY FOR ALL .
Goody Grope , however , reached her sixtieth year , without ever seeing this lucky day ; and now , in her old age , she was a beggar , without a house to shelter her , a bed to lie on , or food to put into her mouth , but what she begged from the charity of those who had trusted more than she had to industry and less to LUCK .
`` Ah , Mary , honey !
give me a potato and a sup of something , for the love o ' mercy ; for not a bit have I had all day , except half a glass of whisky and a halfpenny worth of tobacco ! ''
Mary immediately set before her some milk , and picked a good potato out of the bowl for her .
She was sorry to see such an old woman in such a wretched condition .
Goody Grope said she would rather have spirits of some kind or other than milk ; but Mary had no spirits to give her ; so she sat herself down close to the fire , and after she had sighed and groaned and smoked for some time , she said to Mary , `` Well , and what have you done with the treasure you had the luck to find ? ''
Mary told her that she had carried it to Mr .
Hopkins , the agent .
`` That 's not what I would have done in your place , '' replied the old woman .
`` When good luck came to you , what a shame to turn your back upon it !
But it is idle talking of what 's done -- that 's past ; but I 'll try my luck in this here castle before next St .
Patrick 's day comes about .
I was told it was more than twenty miles from our bog or I would have been here long ago ; but better late than never . ''
Mary was much alarmed , and not without reason , at this speech ; for she knew that if Goody Grope once set to work at the foundation of the old castle of Rossmore , she would soon bring it all down .
It was in vain to talk to Goody Grope of the danger of burying herself under the ruins , or of the improbability of her meeting with another pot of gold coins .
She set her elbow upon her knees , and stopping her ears with her hands bid Mary and her sisters not to waste their breath advising their elders ; for that , let them say what they would , she would fall to work the next morning , `` BARRING you 'll make it worth my while to let it alone . ''
`` And what will make it worth your while to let it alone ? ''
said Mary ; for she saw that she must either get into a quarrel or give up her habitation , or comply with the conditions of this provoking old woman .
Half a crown , Goody Grope said , was the least she could be content to take .
Mary paid the half-crown , and was in hopes that she had got rid for ever of her tormentor , but she was mistaken , for scarcely was the week at an end before the old woman appeared before her again , and repeated her threats of falling to work the next morning , unless she had something given to her to buy tobacco .
The next day and the next , and the next , Goody Grope came on the same errand , and poor Mary , who could ill-afford to supply her constantly with halfpence , at last exclaimed , `` I am sure the finding of this treasure has not been any good luck to us , but quite the contrary ; and I wish we never had found it . ''
Mary did not yet know how much she was to suffer on account of this unfortunate pot of gold coins .
Mr .
Hopkins , the agent , imagined that no one knew of the discovery of this treasure but himself and these poor children ; so , not being as honest as they were , he resolved to keep it for his own use .
He was surprised some weeks afterwards to receive a letter from his employer , Mr .
Harvey , demanding from him the coins which had been discovered at Rossmore Castle .
Hopkins had sold the gold coins , and some of the others ; and he flattered himself that the children , and the young ladies , to whom he now found they had been shown , could not tell whether what they had seen were gold or not , and he was not in the least apprehensive that those of Henry the Seventh 's reign should be reclaimed from him as he thought they had escaped attention .
So he sent over the silver coins and others of little value , and apologized for his not having mentioned them before , by saying that he considered them as mere rubbish .
Mr .
Harvey , in reply , observed that he could not consider as rubbish the gold coins which were amongst them when they were discovered ; and he inquired why these gold coins , and those of the reign of Henry the Seventh , were not now sent to him .
Mr .
Hopkins denied that he had ever received any such ; but he was thunderstruck when Mr .
Harvey , in reply to this falsehood , sent him a list of the coins which the orphans had deposited with him , and exact drawings of those that were missing .
He informed him that this list and these drawings came from two ladies who had seen the coins in question .
Mr .
Hopkins thought that he had no means of escape but by boldly persisting in falsehood .
He replied , that it was very likely such coins had been found at Rossmore Castle , and that the ladies alluded to had probably seen them ; but he positively declared that they never came to his hands ; that he had restored all that were deposited with him ; and that , as to the others , he supposed they must have been taken out of the pot by the children , or by Edmund or Mary on their way from the ladies' house to his .
The orphans were shocked and astonished when they heard , from Isabella and Caroline , the charge that was made against them .
They looked at one another in silence for some moments .
Then Peggy exclaimed -- '' Sure !
Mr .
Hopkins has forgotten himself strangely .
Does not he remember Edmund's counting the things to him upon the great table in his hall , and we all standing by !
I remember it as well as if it was this instant . ''
`` And so do I , '' cried Anne .
`` And do n't you recollect , Mary , your picking out the gold ones , and telling Mr .
Hopkins that they were gold ; and he said you knew nothing of the matter ; and I was going to tell him that Miss Isabella had tried them , and knew that they were gold ?
but just then there came in some tenants to pay their rent , and he pushed us out , and twitched from my hand the piece of gold which I had taken up to show him the bright spot which Miss Isabella had cleaned by the stuff that she had poured on it ?
I believe he was afraid I should steal it ; he twitched it from my hand in such a hurry .
Do , Edmund ; do , Mary -- let us go to him , and put him in mind of all this . ''
`` I 'll go to him no more , '' said Edmund , sturdily .
`` He is a bad man -- I'll never go to him again .
Mary , do n't be cast down -- we have no need to be cast down -- we are honest . ''
`` True , '' said Mary ; `` but is not it a hard case that we , who have lived , as my mother did all her life before us , in peace and honesty with all the world , should now have our good name taken from us , when -- '' Mary 's voice faltered and stopped .
`` It ca n't be taken from us , '' cried Edmund , `` poor orphans though we are , and he a rich gentleman , as he calls himself .
Let him say and do what he will , he ca n't hurt our good name . ''
Edmund was mistaken , alas !
and Mary had but too much reason for her fears .
The affair was a great deal talked of ; and the agent spared no pains to have the story told his own way .
The orphans , conscious of their own innocence , took no pains about the matter ; and the consequence was , that all who knew them well had no doubt of their honesty ; but many , who knew nothing of them , concluded that the agent must be in the right and the children in the wrong .
The buzz of scandal went on for some time without reaching their ears , because they lived very retiredly .
But one day , when Mary went to sell some stockings of Peggy 's knitting at the neighbouring fair , the man to whom she sold them bid her write her name on the back of a note , and exclaimed , on seeing it -- '' Ho !
ho !
mistress ; I 'd not have had any dealings with you , had I known your name sooner .
Where 's the gold that you found at Rossmore Castle ? ''
It was in vain that Mary related the fact .
She saw that she gained no belief , as her character was not known to this man , or to any of those who were present .
She left the fair as soon as she could ; and though she struggled against it , she felt very melancholy .
Still she exerted herself every day at her little manufacture ; and she endeavoured to console herself by reflecting that she had two friends left who would not give up her character , and who continued steadily to protect her and her sisters .
Isabella and Caroline everywhere asserted their belief in the integrity of the orphans , but to prove it was in this instance out of their power .
Mr .
Hopkins , the agent , and his friends , constantly repeated that the gold coins were taken away in coming from their house to his ; and these ladies were blamed by many people for continuing to countenance those that were , with great reason , suspected to be thieves .
The orphans were in a worse condition than ever when the winter came on , and their benefactresses left the country to spend some months in Dublin .
The old castle , it was true , was likely to last through the winter , as the mason said ; but though the want of a comfortable house to live in was , a little while ago , the uppermost thing in Mary 's thoughts , now it was not so .
One night as Mary was going to bed , she heard someone knocking hard at the door .
`` Mary , are you up ?
let us in , '' cried a voice , which she knew to be the voice of Betsy Green , the postmaster 's daughter , who lived in the village near them .
She let Betsy in , and asked what she could want at such a time of night .
`` Give me sixpence , and I 'll tell you , '' said Betsy ; `` but waken Anne and Peggy .
Here 's a letter just come by post for you , and I stepped over to you with it ; because I guessed you 'd be glad to have it , seeing it is your brother 's handwriting . ''
Peggy and Anne were soon roused , when they heard that there was a letter from Edmund .
It was by one of his rush candles that Mary read it ; and the letter was as follows : -- '' DEAR MARY , NANCY , AND LITTLE PEG , -- '' Joy !
joy ! -- I always said the truth would come out at last ; and that he could not take our good name from us .
But I will not tell you how it all came about till we meet , which will be next week , as we are ( I mean , master and mistress , and the young ladies -- bless them ! -- and Mr .
Gilbert and I ) coming down to the vicarage to keep Christmas ; and a happy Christmas 't is likely to be for honest folks .
As for they that are not honest , it is not for them to expect to be happy , at Christmas , or any other time .
You shall know all when we meet .
So , till then , fare ye well , dear Mary , Nancy , and little Peg .
`` Your joyful and affectionate brother , EDMUND . ''
To comprehend why Edmund is joyful , our readers must be informed of certain things which happened after Isabella and Caroline went to Dublin .
One morning they went with their father and mother to see the magnificent library of a nobleman , who took generous and polite pleasure in thus sharing the advantages of his wealth and station with all who had any pretensions to science or literature .
Knowing that the gentleman who was now come to see his library was skilled in antiquities , the nobleman opened a drawer of medals , to ask his opinion concerning the age of some coins , which he had lately purchased at a high price .
They were the very same which the orphans had found at Rossmore Castle .
Isabella and Caroline knew them again instantly ; and as the cross which Isabella had made on each of them was still visible through a magnifying glass , there could be no possibility of doubt .
The nobleman , who was much interested both by the story of these orphans , and the manner in which it was told to him , sent immediately for the person from whom he had purchased the coins .
He was a Jew broker .
At first he refused to tell them from whom he got them , because he had bought them , he said , under a promise of secrecy .
Being further pressed , he acknowledged that it was made a condition in his bargain that he should not sell them to anyone in Ireland , but that he had been tempted by the high price the present noble possessor had offered .
At last , when the Jew was informed that the coins were stolen , and that he would be proceeded against as a receiver of stolen goods , if he did not confess the whole truth , he declared that he had purchased them from a gentleman , whom he had never seen before or since ; but he added , that he could swear to his person , if he saw him again .
Now , Mr .
Hopkins , the agent , was at this time in Dublin , and Caroline's father posted the Jew , the next day , in the back-parlour of a banker's house , with whom Mr .
Hopkins had , on this day , appointed to settle some accounts .
Mr .
Hopkins came -- the Jew knew him -- swore that he was the man who had sold the coins to him ; and thus the guilt of the agent and the innocence of the orphans were completely proved .
A full account of all that happened was sent to England to Mr .
Harvey , their landlord , and a few posts afterwards there came a letter from him , containing a dismissal of the dishonest agent , and a reward for the honest and industrious orphans .
Mr .
Harvey desired that Mary and her sisters might have the slated house , rent free , from this time forward , under the care of ladies Isabella and Caroline , as long as Mary or her sisters should carry on in it any useful business .
This was the joyful news which Edmund had to tell his sisters .
All the neighbours shared in their joy , and the day of their removal from the ruins of Rossmore Castle to their new house was the happiest of the Christmas holidays .
They were not envied for their prosperity ; because everybody saw that it was the reward of their good conduct ; everybody except Goody Grope .
She exclaimed , as she wrung her hands with violent expressions of sorrow -- '' Bad luck to me !
bad luck to me ! -- Why did n't I go sooner to that there castle ?
It is all luck , all luck in this world ; but I never had no luck .
Think of the luck of these childer , that have found a pot of gold , and such great , grand friends , and a slated house , and all : and here am I , with scarce a rag to cover me , and not a potato to put into my mouth ! -- I , that have been looking under ground all my days for treasure , not to have a halfpenny at the last , to buy me tobacco ! ''
`` That is the very reason that you have not a halfpenny , '' said Betsy .
`` Here Mary has been working hard , and so have her two little sisters and her brother , for these five years past ; and they have made money for themselves by their own industry -- and friends too -- not by luck , but by -- '' '' Phoo !
phoo ! ''
interrupted Goody Grope ; `` do n't be prating ; do n't I know as well as you do , that they found a pot of gold , BY GOOD LUCK ?
and is not that the cause why they are going to live in a slated house now ? ''
`` No , '' replied the postmaster 's daughter ; `` this house is given to them AS A REWARD -- that was the word in the letter ; for I saw it .
Edmund showed it to me , and will show it to anyone that wants to see .
This house was given to them 'AS A REWARD FOR THEIR HONESTY . ' ''
LAZY LAWRENCE .
In the pleasant valley of Ashton there lived an elderly woman of the name of Preston .
She had a small neat cottage , and there was not a weed to be seen in her garden .
It was upon her garden that she chiefly depended for support ; it consisted of strawberry beds , and one small border for flowers .
The pinks and roses she tied up in nice nosegays , and sent either to Clifton or Bristol to be sold .
As to her strawberries , she did not send them to market , because it was the custom for numbers of people to come from Clifton , in the summer time , to eat strawberries and cream at the gardens in Ashton .
Now , the widow Preston was so obliging , active and good-humoured , that everyone who came to see her was pleased .
She lived happily in this manner for several years ; but , alas !
one autumn she fell sick , and , during her illness , everything went wrong ; her garden was neglected , her cow died , and all the money which she had saved was spent in paying for medicines .
The winter passed away , while she was so weak that she could earn but little by her work ; and when the summer came , her rent was called for , and the rent was not ready in her little purse as usual .
She begged a few months ' delay , and they were granted to her ; but at the end of that time there was no resource but to sell her horse Lightfoot .
Now Lightfoot , though perhaps he had seen his best days , was a very great favourite .
In his youth he had always carried the dame to the market behind her husband ; and it was now her little son Jem 's turn to ride him .
It was Jem 's business to feed Lightfoot , and to take care of him -- a charge which he never neglected , for , besides being a very good natured , he was a very industrious boy .
`` It will go near to break my Jem 's heart , '' said Dame Preston to herself , as she sat one evening beside the fire stirring the embers , and considering how she had best open the matter to her son , who stood opposite to her , eating a dry crust of bread very heartily for supper .
`` Jem , '' said the old woman , `` what , ar't hungry ? ''
`` That I am , brave and hungry ! ''
`` Ay !
no wonder , you 've been brave hard at work -- Eh ? ''
`` Brave hard !
I wish it was not so dark , mother , that you might just step out and see the great bed I 've dug ; I know you 'd say it was no bad day's work -- and oh , mother !
I 've good news : Farmer Truck will give us the giant strawberries , and I 'm to go for 'em tomorrow morning , and I 'll be back afore breakfast . ''
`` God bless the boy !
how he talks ! -- Four mile there , and four mile back again , afore breakfast . ''
`` Ay , upon Lightfoot , you know , mother , very easily ; may n't I ? ''
`` Ay , child ! ''
`` Why do you sigh , mother ? ''
`` Finish thy supper , child . ''
`` I 've done ! ''
cried Jem , swallowing the last mouthful hastily , as if he thought he had been too long at supper -- '' and now for the great needle ; I must see and mend Lightfoot 's bridle afore I go to bed . ''
To work he set , by the light of the fire , and the dame having once more stirred it , began again with `` Jem , dear , does he go lame at all now ? ''
`` What , Lightfoot !
Oh , la , no , not he -- never was so well of his lameness in all his life .
He 's grown quite young again , I think , and then he 's so fat he can hardly wag . ''
`` God bless him -- that 's right .
We must see , Jem , and keep him fat . ''
`` For what , mother ? ''
`` For Monday fortnight at the fair .
He 's to be -- sold ! ''
`` Lightfoot ! ''
cried Jem , and let the bridle fall from his hand ; `` and WILL mother sell Lightfoot ? ''
`` WILL ?
no : but I MUST , Jem . ''
`` MUST !
who says you MUST ?
why MUST you , mother ? ''
`` I must , I say , child .
Why , must not I pay my debts honestly ; and must not I pay my rent , and was not it called for long and long ago ; and have not I had time ; and did not I promise to pay it for certain Monday fortnight , and am not I two guineas short ; and where am I to get two guineas ?
So what signifies talking , child ? ''
said the widow , leaning her head upon her arm .
`` Lightfoot MUST go . ''
Jem was silent for a few minutes -- '' Two guineas , that 's a great , great deal .
If I worked , and worked , and worked ever so hard , I could no ways earn two guineas AFORE Monday fortnight -- could I , mother ? ''
`` Lord help thee , no ; not an ' work thyself to death . ''
`` But I could earn something , though , I say , '' cried Jem , proudly ; `` and I WILL earn SOMETHING -- if it be ever so little , it will be SOMETHING -- and I shall do my very best ; so I will . ''
`` That I 'm sure of , my child , '' said his mother , drawing him towards her and kissing him ; `` you were always a good , industrious lad , THAT I will say afore your face or behind your back ; -- but it wo n't do now -- Lightfoot MUST go . ''
Jem turned away struggling to hide his tears , and went to bed without saying a word more .
But he knew that crying would do no good ; so he presently wiped his eyes , and lay awake , considering what he could possibly do to save the horse .
`` If I get ever so little , '' he still said to himself , `` it will be SOMETHING ; and who knows but landlord might then wait a bit longer ?
and we might make it all up in time ; for a penny a day might come to two guineas in time . ''
But how to get the first penny was the question .
Then he recollected that one day , when he had been sent to Clifton to sell some flowers , he had seen an old woman with a board beside her covered with various sparkling stones , which people stopped to look at as they passed , and he remembered that some people bought the stones ; one paid twopence , another threepence , and another sixpence for them ; and Jem heard her say that she got them amongst the neighbouring rocks : so he thought that if he tried he might find some too , and sell them as she had done .
Early in the morning he wakened full of this scheme , jumped up , dressed himself , and , having given one look at poor Lightfoot in his stable , set off to Clifton in search of the old woman , to inquire where she found her sparkling stones .
But it was too early in the morning , the old woman was not at her seat ; so he turned back again , disappointed .
He did not waste his time waiting for her , but saddled and bridled Lightfoot , and went to Farmer Truck 's for the giant strawberries .
A great part of the morning was spent in putting them into the ground ; and , as soon as that was finished , he set out again in quest of the old woman , whom , to his great joy , he spied sitting at her corner of the street with her board before her .
But this old woman was deaf and cross ; and when at last Jem made her hear his questions , he could get no answer from her , but that she found the fossils where he would never find any more .
`` But ca n't I look where you looked ? ''
`` Look away , nobody hinders you , '' replied the old woman ; and these were the only words she would say .
Jem was not , however , a boy to be easily discouraged ; he went to the rocks , and walked slowly along , looking at all the stones as he passed .
Presently he came to a place where a number of men were at work loosening some large rocks , and one amongst the workmen was stooping down looking for something very eagerly ; Jem ran up , and asked if he could help him .
`` Yes , '' said the man , `` you can ; I 've just dropped , amongst this heap of rubbish , a fine piece of crystal that I got to-day . ''
`` What kind of a looking thing is it ? ''
said Jem .
`` White , and like glass , '' said the man , and went on working whilst Jem looked very carefully over the heap of rubbish for a great while .
`` Come , '' said the man , `` it 's gone for ever ; do n't trouble yourself any more , my boy . ''
`` It 's no trouble ; I 'll look a little longer ; we 'll not give it up so soon , '' said Jem ; and after he had looked a little longer , he found the piece of crystal .
`` Thank ' e , '' said the man , `` you are a fine little industrious fellow . ''
Jem , encouraged by the tone of voice in which the man spoke this , ventured to ask him the same questions which he had asked the old woman .
`` One good turn deserves another , '' said the man ; `` we are going to dinner just now , and shall leave off work -- wait for me here , and I 'll make it worth your while . ''
Jem waited ; and , as he was very attentively observing how the workmen went on with their work , he heard somebody near him give a great yawn , and , turning round , he saw stretched upon the grass , beside the river , a boy about his own age , who , in the village of Ashton , as he knew , went by the name of Lazy Lawrence -- a name which he most justly deserved , for he never did anything from morning to night .
He neither worked nor played , but sauntered or lounged about restless and yawning .
His father was an ale-house keeper , and being generally drunk , could take no care of his son ; so that Lazy Lawrence grew every day worse and worse .
However , some of the neighbours said that he was a good natured , poor fellow enough , and would never do anyone harm but himself ; whilst others , who were wiser , often shook their heads , and told him that idleness was the root of all evil .
`` What , Lawrence ! ''
cried Jem to him , when he saw him lying upon the grass ; '' what , are you asleep ? ''
`` Not quite . ''
`` Are you awake ? ''
`` Not quite . ''
`` What are you doing there ? ''
`` Nothing . ''
`` What are you thinking of ? ''
`` Nothing . ''
`` What makes you lie there ? ''
`` I do n't know -- because I ca n't find anybody to play with me to-day .
Will you come and play ? ''
`` No , I ca n't ; I 'm busy . ''
`` Busy , '' cried Lawrence , stretching himself , `` you are always busy .
I would not be you for the world , to have so much to do always . ''
`` And I , '' said Jem , laughing , `` would not be you for the world , to have nothing to do . ''
They then parted , for the workman just then called Jem to follow him .
He took him home to his own house , and showed him a parcel of fossils , which he had gathered , he said , on purpose to sell , but had never had time enough to sell them .
Now , however , he set about the task ; and having picked out those which he judged to be the best , he put them in a small basket , and gave them to Jem to sell , upon condition that he should bring him half of what he got .
Jem , pleased to be employed , was ready to agree to what the man proposed , provided his mother had no objection .
When he went home to dinner , he told his mother his scheme , and she smiled , and said he might do as he pleased ; for she was not afraid of his being from home .
`` You are not an idle boy , '' said she ; `` so there is little danger of your getting into any mischief . ''
Accordingly Jem that evening took his stand , with his little basket , upon the bank of the river , just at the place where people land from a ferry- boat , and the walk turns to the wells , and numbers of people perpetually pass to drink the waters .
He chose his place well , and waited nearly all the evening , offering his fossils with great assiduity to every passenger ; but not one person bought any .
`` Hallo ! ''
cried some sailors , who had just rowed a boat to land , `` bear a hand here , will you , my little fellow , and carry these parcels for us into yonder house ? ''
Jem ran down immediately for the parcels , and did what he was asked to do so quickly , and with so much good-will , that the master of the boat took notice of him , and , when he was going away , stopped to ask him what he had got in his little basket ; and when he saw that they were fossils , he immediately told Jem to follow him , for that he was going to carry some shells he had brought from abroad to a lady in the neighbourhood who was making a grotto .
`` She will very likely buy your stones into the bargain .
Come along , my lad ; we can but try . ''
The lady lived but a very little way off , so that they were soon at her house .
She was alone in her parlour , and was sorting a bundle of feathers of different colours ; they lay on a sheet of pasteboard upon a window seat , and it happened that as the sailor was bustling round the table to show off his shells , he knocked down the sheet of pasteboard , and scattered all the feathers .
The lady looked very sorry , which Jem observing , he took the opportunity , whilst she was busy looking over the sailor 's bag of shells , to gather together all the feathers , and sort them according to their different colours , as he had seen them sorted when he first came into the room .
`` Where is the little boy you brought with you ?
I thought I saw him here just now . ''
`` And here I am , ma'am , '' cried Jem , creeping from under the table , with some few remaining feathers which he had picked from the carpet ; `` I thought , '' added he , pointing to the others , `` I had better be doing something than standing idle , ma'am . ''
She smiled , and , pleased with his activity and simplicity , began to ask him several questions ; such as who he was , where he lived , what employment he had , and how much a day he earned by gathering fossils .
`` This is the first day I ever tried , '' said Jem ; `` I never sold any yet , and if you do n't buy 'em now , ma'am , I 'm afraid nobody else will ; for I 've asked everybody else . ''
`` Come , then , '' said the lady , laughing , `` if that is the case , I think I had better buy them all . ''
So , emptying all the fossils out of his basket , she put half a crown into it .
Jem 's eyes sparkled with joy .
`` Oh , thank you , ma'am , '' said he , `` I will be sure and bring you as many more , to-morrow . ''
`` Yes , but I do n't promise you , '' said she , `` to give you half a crown , to- morrow . ''
`` But , perhaps , though you do n't promise it , you will . ''
`` No , '' said the lady , `` do not deceive yourself ; I assure you that I will not .
THAT , instead of encouraging you to be industrious , would teach you to be idle . ''
Jem did not quite understand what she meant by this , but answered , `` I'm sure I do n't wish to be idle ; what I want is to earn something every day , if I know how ; I 'm sure I do n't wish to be idle .
If you knew all , you'd know I did not . ''
`` How do you mean , IF I KNEW ALL ? ''
`` Why , I mean , if you knew about Lightfoot . ''
`` Who 's Lightfoot ? ''
`` Why , mammy 's horse , '' added Jem , looking out of the window ; `` I must make haste home , and feed him afore it gets dark ; he 'll wonder what 's gone with me . ''
`` Let him wonder a few minutes longer , '' said the lady , `` and tell me the rest of your story . ''
`` I 've no story , ma'am , to tell , but as how mammy says he must go to the fair Monday fortnight , to be sold , if she ca n't get the two guineas for her rent ; and I should be main sorry to part with him , for I love him , and he loves me ; so I 'll work for him , I will , all I can .
To be sure , as mammy says , I have no chance , such a little fellow as I am , of earning two guineas afore Monday fortnight . ''
`` But are you willing earnestly to work ? ''
said the lady ; `` you know there is a great deal of difference between picking up a few stones , and working steadily every day , and all day long . ''
`` But , '' said Jem , `` I would work every day , and all day long . ''
`` Then , '' said the lady , `` I will give you work .
Come here , to-morrow morning , and my gardener will set you to weed the shrubberies , and I will pay you sixpence a day .
Remember , you must be at the gates by six o'clock . ''
Jem bowed , thanked her , and went away .
It was late in the evening , and Jem was impatient to get home to feed Lightfoot ; yet he recollected that he had promised the man who had trusted him to sell the fossils , that he would bring him half of what he got for them ; so he thought that he had better go to him directly ; and away he went , running along by the waterside about a quarter of a mile , till he came to the man 's house .
He was just come home from work , and was surprised when Jem showed him the half-crown , saying , `` Look what I got for the stones ; you are to have half , you know . ''
`` No , '' said the man , when he had heard his story , `` I shall not take half of that ; it was given to you .
I expected but a shilling at the most , and the half of that is but sixpence , and that I 'll take .
Wife , give the lad two shillings , and take this half-crown . ''
So the wife opened an old glove , and took out two shillings ; and the man , as she opened the glove , put in his fingers , and took out a little silver penny .
`` There , he shall have that into the bargain for his honesty -- honesty is the best policy -- there 's a lucky penny for you , that I 've kept ever since I can remember . ''
`` Do n't you ever go to part with it , do ye hear ! ''
cried the woman .
`` Let him do what he will with it , wife , '' said the man .
`` But , '' argued the wife , `` another penny would do just as well to buy gingerbread ; and that 's what it will go for . ''
`` No , that it shall not , I promise you , '' said Jem ; and so he ran away home , fed Lightfoot , stroked him , went to bed , jumped up at five o'clock in the morning , and went singing to work as gay as a lark .
Four days he worked `` every day and all day long '' ; and every evening the lady , when she came out to walk in her gardens , looked at his work .
At last she said to her gardener , `` This little boy works very hard . ''
`` Never had so good a little boy about the grounds , '' said the gardener ; '' he 's always at his work , let me come by when I will , and he has got twice as much done as another would do ; yes , twice as much , ma'am ; for look here -- he began at this 'ere rose-bush , and now he 's got to where you stand , ma'am ; and here is the day 's work that t'other boy , and he 's three years older too , did to-day -- I say , measure Jem 's fairly , and it 's twice as much , I 'm sure . ''
`` Well , '' said the lady to her gardener , `` show me how much is a fair day's work for a boy of his age . ''
`` Come at six o'clock and go at six ?
why , about this much , ma'am , '' said the gardener , marking off a piece of the border with his spade .
`` Then , little boy , '' said the lady , `` so much shall be your task every day .
The gardener will mark it off for you ; and when you 've done , the rest of the day you may do what you please . ''
Jem was extremely glad of this ; and the next day he had finished his task by four o'clock ; so that he had all the rest of the evening to himself .
He was as fond of play as any little boy could be ; and when he was at it he played with all the eagerness and gaiety imaginable ; so as soon as he had finished his task , fed Lightfoot , and put by the sixpence he had earned that day , he ran to the playground in the village , where he found a party of boys playing , and amongst them Lazy Lawrence , who indeed was not playing , but lounging upon a gate , with his thumb in his mouth .
The rest were playing at cricket .
Jem joined them , and was the merriest and most active amongst them ; till , at last , when quite out of breath with running , he was obliged to give up to rest himself , and sat down upon the stile , close to the gate on which Lazy Lawrence was swinging .
`` And why do n't you play , Lawrence ? ''
said he .
`` I 'm tired , '' said Lawrence .
`` Tired of what ? ''
`` I do n't know well what tires me ; grandmother says I 'm ill , and I must take something -- I do n't know what ails me . ''
`` Oh , pugh !
take a good race -- one , two , three , and away -- and you 'll find yourself as well as ever .
Come , run -- one , two , three , and away . ''
`` Ah , no , I ca n't run , indeed , '' said he , hanging back heavily ; `` you know I can play all day long if I like it , so I do n't mind play as you do , who have only one hour for it . ''
`` So much the worse for you .
Come , now , I 'm quite fresh again , will you have one game at ball ?
do . ''
`` No , I tell you I ca n't ; I 'm as tired as if I had been working all day long as hard as a horse . ''
`` Ten times more , '' said Jem , `` for I have been working all day long , as hard as a horse , and yet you see I 'm not a bit tired , only a little out of breath just now . ''
`` That 's very odd , '' said Lawrence , and yawned , for want of some better answer ; then taking out a handful of halfpence , -- '' See what I got from father today , because I asked him just at the right time , when he had drunk a glass or two ; then I can get anything I want out of him -- see !
a penny , twopence , threepence , fourpence -- there 's eightpence in all ; would not you be happy if you had EIGHTPENCE ? ''
`` Why , I do n't know , '' said Jem , laughing , `` for you do n't seem happy , and you HAVE EIGHTPENCE . ''
`` That does not signify , though .
I 'm sure you only say that because you envy me .
You do n't know what it is to have eightpence .
You never had more than twopence or threepence at a time in all your life . ''
Jem smiled .
`` Oh , as to that , '' said he , `` you are mistaken , for I have at this very time more than twopence , threepence , or eightpence either .
I have -- let me -- see -- stones , two shillings ; then five days ' work -- that's five sixpences , that 's two shillings and sixpence ; in all , makes four shillings and sixpence ; and my silver penny , is four and sevenpence -- four and sevenpence ! ''
`` You have not ! ''
said Lawrence , roused so as absolutely to stand upright , '' four and sevenpence , have you ?
Show it me , and then I 'll believe you . ''
`` Follow me , then , '' cried Jem , `` and I 'll soon make you believe me ; come . ''
`` Is it far ? ''
said Lawrence , following half-running , half-hobbling , till he came to the stable , where Jem showed him his treasure .
`` And how did you come by it -- honestly ? ''
`` Honestly !
to be sure I did ; I earned it all . ''
`` Lord bless me , earned it !
well , I 've a great mind to work ; but then it's such hot weather , besides , grandmother says I 'm not strong enough yet for hard work ; and besides , I know how to coax daddy out of money when I want it , so I need not work .
But four and sevenpence ; let 's see , what will you do with it all ? ''
`` That 's a secret , '' said Jem , looking great .
`` I can guess ; I know what I 'd do with it if it was mine .
First , I 'd buy pocketfuls of gingerbread ; then I 'd buy ever so many apples and nuts .
Do n't you love nuts ?
I 'd buy nuts enough to last me from this time to Christmas , and I 'd make little Newton crack 'em for me , for that 's the worst of nuts ; there 's the trouble of cracking 'em . ''
`` Well , you never deserve to have a nut . ''
`` But you 'll give me some of yours , '' said Lawrence , in a fawning tone ; for he thought it easier to coax than to work -- '' you 'll give me some of your good things , wo n't you ? ''
`` I shall not have any of those good things , '' said Jem .
`` Then , what will you do with all your money ? ''
`` Oh , I know very well what to do with it ; but , as I told you , that 's a secret , and I sha'n't tell it anybody .
Come now , let 's go back and play- -their game 's up , I daresay . ''
Lawrence went back with him , full of curiosity , and out of humour with himself and his eightpence .
`` If I had four and sevenpence , '' said he to himself , `` I certainly should be happy ! ''
The next day , as usual , Jem jumped up before six o'clock and went to his work , whilst Lazy Lawrence sauntered about without knowing what to do with himself .
In the course of two days he laid out sixpence of his money in apples and gingerbread ; and as long as these lasted , he found himself well received by his companions ; but , at length the third day he spent his last halfpenny , and when it was gone , unfortunately some nuts tempted him very much , but he had no money to pay for them ; so he ran home to coax his father , as he called it .
When he got home he heard his father talking very loud , and at first he thought he was drunk ; but when he opened the kitchen door , he saw that he was not drunk , but angry .
`` You lazy dog ! ''
cried he , turning suddenly upon Lawrence , and gave him such a violent box on the ear as made the light flash from his eyes ; `` you lazy dog !
See what you 've done for me -- look ! -- look , look , I say ! ''
Lawrence looked as soon as he came to the use of his senses , and with fear , amazement and remorse , beheld at least a dozen bottles burst , and the fine Worcestershire cider streaming over the floor .
`` Now , did not I order you three days ago to carry these bottles to the cellar , and did not I charge you to wire the corks ?
answer me , you lazy rascal ; did not I ? ''
`` Yes , '' said Lawrence , scratching his head .
`` And why was not it done , I ask you ? ''
cried his father , with renewed anger , as another bottle burst at the moment .
`` What do you stand there for , you lazy brat ?
why do n't you move , I say ?
No , no , '' catching hold of him , `` I believe you ca n't move ; but I 'll make you . ''
And he shook him till Lawrence was so giddy he could not stand .
`` What had you to think of ?
What had you to do all day long that you could not carry my cider , my Worcestershire cider , to the cellar when I bid you ?
But go , you'll never be good for anything ; you are such a lazy rascal -- get out of my sight ! ''
So saying , he pushed him out of the house door , and Lawrence sneaked off , seeing that this was no time to make his petition for halfpence .
The next day he saw the nuts again , and wishing for them more than ever , he went home , in hopes that his father , as he said to himself , would be in a better humour .
But the cider was still fresh in his recollection ; and the moment Lawrence began to whisper the word `` halfpenny '' in his ear , his father swore , with a loud oath , `` I will not give you a halfpenny , no , not a farthing , for a month to come .
If you want money , go work for it ; I 've had enough of your laziness -- go work ! ''
At these terrible words Lawrence burst into tears , and , going to the side of a ditch , sat down and cried for an hour ; and when he had cried till he could cry no more , he exerted himself so far as to empty his pockets , to see whether there might not happen to be one halfpenny left ; and , to his great joy , in the farthest corner of his pocket one halfpenny was found .
With this he proceeded to the fruit woman 's stall .
She was busy weighing out some plums , so he was obliged to wait ; and whilst he was waiting he heard some people near him talking and laughing very loud .
The fruit woman 's stall was at the gate of an inn yard ; and peeping through the gate in this yard , Lawrence saw a postilion and a stable boy , about his own size , playing at pitch farthing .
He stood by watching them for a few minutes .
`` I began but with one halfpenny , '' cried the stable boy , with an oath , `` and now I 've got twopence ! ''
added he , jingling the halfpence in his waistcoat pocket .
Lawrence was moved at the sound , and said to himself , `` If _I_ begin with one halfpenny I may end , like him , with having twopence ; and it is easier to play at pitch farthing than to work . ''
So he stepped forward , presenting his halfpenny , offering to toss up with the stable boy , who , after looking him full in the face , accepted the proposal , and threw his halfpenny into the air .
`` Head or tail ? ''
cried he .
`` Head , '' replied Lawrence , and it came up head .
He seized the penny , surprised at his own success , and would have gone instantly to have laid it out in nuts ; but the stable boy stopped him , and tempted him to throw again .
This time Lawrence lost ; he threw again and won ; and so he went on , sometimes losing , but most frequently winning , till half the morning was lost .
At last , however , finding himself the master of three halfpence , said he would play no more .
The stable boy , grumbling , swore he would have his revenge another time , and Lawrence went and bought his nuts .
`` It is a good thing , '' said he to himself , `` to play at pitch farthing ; the next time I want a halfpenny I 'll not ask my father for it , nor go to work neither . ''
Satisfied with this resolution , he sat down to crack his nuts at his leisure , upon the horse block in the inn yard .
Here , whilst he ate , he overheard the conversation of the stable boys and postilions .
At first their shocking oaths and loud wrangling frightened and shocked him ; for Lawrence , though lazy , had not yet learned to be a wicked boy .
But , by degrees , he was accustomed to the swearing and quarrelling , and took a delight and interest in their disputes and battles .
As this was an amusement which he could enjoy without any sort of exertion , he soon grew so fond of it , that every day he returned to the stable yard , and the horse block became his constant seat .
Here he found some relief from the insupportable fatigue of doing nothing , and here , hour after hour , with his elbows on his knees , and his head on his hands , he sat , the spectator of wickedness .
Gaming , cheating and lying soon became familiar to him ; and , to complete his ruin , he formed a sudden and close intimacy with the stable boy ( a very bad boy ) with whom he had first begun to game .
The consequences of this intimacy we shall presently see .
But it is now time to inquire what little Jem had been doing all this while .
One day , after Jem had finished his task , the gardener asked him to stay a little while , to help him to carry some geranium pots into the hall .
Jem , always active and obliging , readily stayed from play , and was carrying in a heavy flower pot , when his mistress crossed the hall .
`` What a terrible litter ! ''
said she , `` you are making here -- why do n't you wipe your shoes upon the mat ? ''
Jem turned to look for the mat , but he saw none .
`` Oh , '' said the lady recollecting herself , `` I ca n't blame you , for there is no mat . ''
`` No , ma'am , '' said the gardener , `` nor I do n't know when , if ever , the man will bring home those mats you bespoke , ma'am . ''
`` I am very sorry to hear that , '' said the lady ; `` I wish we could find somebody who would do them , if he ca n't .
I should not care what sort of mats they were , so that one could wipe one 's feet on them . ''
Jem , as he was sweeping away the litter , when he heard these last words , said to himself , `` Perhaps I could make a mat . ''
And all the way home , as he trudged along whistling , he was thinking over a scheme for making mats , which , however bold it may appear , he did not despair of executing , with patience and industry .
Many were the difficulties which his '' prophetic eye '' foresaw ; but he felt within himself that spirit which spurs men on to great enterprises , and makes them `` trample on impossibilities . ''
In the first place , he recollected that he had seen Lazy Lawrence , whilst he lounged upon the gate , twist a bit of heath into different shapes ; and he thought , that if he could find some way of plaiting heath firmly together , it would make a very pretty green soft mat , which would do very well for one to wipe one 's shoes on .
About a mile from his mother 's house , on the common which Jem rode over when he went to Farmer Truck 's for the giant strawberries , he remembered to have seen a great quantity of this heath ; and , as it was now only six o'clock in the evening , he knew that he should have time to feed Lightfoot , stroke him , go to the common , return , and make one trial of his skill before he went to bed .
Lightfoot carried him swiftly to the common , and there Jem gathered as much of the heath as he thought he should want .
But what toil !
what time !
what pains did it cost him , before he could make anything like a mat !
Twenty times he was ready to throw aside the heath , and give up his project , from impatience of repeated disappointments .
But still he persevered .
Nothing TRULY GREAT can be accomplished without toil and time .
Two hours he worked before he went to bed .
All his play hours the next day he spent at his mat ; which , in all , made five hours of fruitless attempts .
The sixth , however , repaid him for the labours of the other five .
He conquered his grand difficulty of fastening the heath substantially together , and at length completely finished a mat , which far surpassed his most sanguine expectations .
He was extremely happy -- sang , danced round it -- whistled -- looked at it again and again , and could hardly leave off looking at it when it was time to go to bed .
He laid it by his bedside , that he might see it the moment he awoke in the morning .
And now came the grand pleasure of carrying it to his mistress .
She looked fully as much surprised as he expected , when she saw it , and when she heard who made it .
After having duly admired it , she asked how much he expected for his mat .
`` Expect ! -- Nothing , ma'am , '' said Jem ; `` I meant to give it you , if you 'd have it ; I did not mean to sell it .
I made it in my play hours , I was very happy in making it ; and I 'm very glad , too , that you like it ; and if you please to keep it , ma'am , that 's all . ''
`` But that 's not all , '' said the lady .
`` Spend your time no more in weeding in my garden , you can employ yourself much better ; you shall have the reward of your ingenuity as well as of your industry .
Make as many more such mats as you can , and I will take care and dispose of them for you . ''
`` Thank ' e , ma'am , '' said Jem , making his best bow , for he thought by the lady 's looks that she meant to do him a favour , though he repeated to himself , `` Dispose of them , what does that mean ? ''
The next day he went to work to make more mats , and he soon learned to make them so well and quickly , that he was surprised at his own success .
In every one he made he found less difficulty , so that , instead of making two , he could soon make four in a day .
In a fortnight he made eighteen .
It was Saturday night when he finished , and he carried , at three journeys , his eighteen mats to his mistress ' house ; piled them all up in the hall , and stood with his hat off , with a look of proud humility , beside the pile , waiting for his mistress ' appearance .
Presently a folding-door , at one end of the hall , opened , and he saw his mistress , with a great many gentlemen and ladies , rising from several tables .
`` Oh !
there is my little boy and his mats , '' cried the lady ; and , followed by all the rest of the company , she came into the hall .
Jem modestly retired whilst they looked at his mats ; but in a minute or two his mistress beckoned to him , and when he came into the middle of the circle , he saw that his pile of mats had disappeared .
`` Well , '' said the lady , smiling , `` what do you see that makes you look so surprised ? ''
`` That all my mats are gone , '' said Jem ; `` but you are very welcome . ''
`` Are we ? ''
said the lady , `` well , take up your hat and go home then , for you see that it is getting late , and you know Lightfoot will wonder what 's become of you . ''
Jem turned round to take up his hat , which he had left on the floor .
But how his countenance changed !
the hat was heavy with shillings .
Everyone who had taken a mat had put in two shillings ; so that for the eighteen mats he had got thirty-six shillings .
`` Thirty-six shillings , '' said the lady ; `` five and sevenpence I think you told me you had earned already -- how much does that make ?
I must add , I believe , one other sixpence to make out your two guineas . ''
`` Two guineas ! ''
exclaimed Jem , now quite conquering his bashfulness , for at the moment he forgot where he was , and saw nobody that was by .
`` Two guineas ! ''
cried he , clapping his hands together , -- '' O , Lightfoot !
O , mother ! ''
Then , recollecting himself , he saw his mistress , whom he now looked up to quite as a friend .
`` Will YOU thank them all ? ''
said he , scarcely daring to glance his eyes round upon the company ; `` will YOU thank 'em , for you know I do n't know how to thank 'em RIGHTLY . ''
Everybody thought , however , that they had been thanked RIGHTLY .
`` Now we wo n't keep you any longer , only , '' said his mistress , `` I have one thing to ask you , that I may be by when you show your treasure to your mother . ''
`` Come , then , '' said Jem , `` come with me now . ''
`` Not now , '' said the lady , laughing ; `` but I will come to Ashton to-morrow evening ; perhaps your mother can find me a few strawberries . ''
`` That she will , '' said Jem : `` I 'll search the garden myself . ''
He now went home , but felt it a great restraint to wait till to-morrow evening before he told his mother .
To console himself he flew to the stable : -- '' Lightfoot , you 're not to be sold on Monday , poor fellow ! ''
said he , patting him , and then could not refrain from counting out his money .
Whilst he was intent upon this , Jem was startled by a noise at the door : somebody was trying to pull up the latch .
It opened , and there came in Lazy Lawrence , with a boy in a red jacket , who had a cock under his arm .
They started when they got into the middle of the stable , and when they saw Jem , who had been at first hidden by the horse .
`` We -- we -- we came , '' stammered Lazy Lawrence -- '' I mean , I came to -- to -- to -- '' '' To ask you , '' continued the stable-boy , in a bold tone , `` whether you will go with us to the cock-fight on Monday ?
See , I 've a fine cock here , and Lawrence told me you were a great friend of his ; so I came . ''
Lawrence now attempted to say something in praise of the pleasures of cock-fighting and in recommendation of his new companion .
But Jem looked at the stable-boy with dislike , and a sort of dread .
Then turning his eyes upon the cock with a look of compassion , said , in a low voice , to Lawrence , `` Shall you like to stand by and see its eyes pecked out ? ''
`` I do n't know , '' said Lawrence , `` as to that ; but they say a cockfight 's a fine sight , and it 's no more cruel in me to go than another ; and a great many go , and I 've nothing else to do , so I shall go . ''
`` But I have something else to do , '' said Jem , laughing , `` so I shall not go . ''
`` But , '' continued Lawrence , `` you know Monday is the great Bristol fair , and one must be merry then , of all the days in the year . ''
`` One day in the year , sure , there 's no harm in being merry , '' said the stable boy .
`` I hope not , '' said Jem ; `` for I know for my part , I am merry every day in the year . ''
`` That 's very odd , '' said Lawrence ; `` but I know for my part , I would not for all the world miss going to the fair , for at least it will be something to talk of for half a year after .
Come , you 'll go , wo n't you ? ''
`` No , '' said Jem , still looking as if he did not like to talk before the ill-looking stranger .
`` Then what will you do with all your money ? ''
`` I 'll tell you about that another time , '' whispered Jem ; `` and do n't you go to see that cock 's eyes pecked out ; it wo n't make you merry , I 'm sure . ''
`` If I had anything else to divert me , '' said Lawrence , hesitating and yawning .
`` Come , '' cried the stable boy , seizing his stretching arm , `` come along , '' cried he ; and , pulling him away from Jem , upon whom he cast a look of extreme contempt ; `` leave him alone , he 's not the sort .
`` What a fool you are , '' said he to Lawrence , the moment he got him out of the stable ; `` you might have known he would not go , else we should soon have trimmed him out of his four and sevenpence .
But how came you to talk of four and sevenpence .
I saw in the manger a hat full of silver . ''
`` Indeed ! ''
exclaimed Lawrence .
`` Yes , indeed ; but why did you stammer so when we first got in ?
You had liked to have blown us all up . ''
`` I was so ashamed , '' said Lawrence , hanging down his head .
`` Ashamed !
but you must not talk of shame now you are in for it , and I sha'n't let you off ; you owe us half a crown , recollect , and I must be paid to-night , so see and get the money somehow or other . ''
After a considerable pause he added , `` I answer for it he 'd never miss half a crown out of all that silver . ''
`` But to steal , '' said Lawrence , drawing back with horror , `` I never thought I should come to that -- and from poor Jem , too -- the money that he has worked so hard for , too . ''
`` But it is not stealing ; we do n't mean to steal ; only to borrow it ; and if we win , which we certainly shall , at the cock-fight , pay it back again , and he 'll never know anything about the matter , and what harm will it do him ?
Besides , what signifies talking , you ca n't go to the cock- fight , or the fair either , if you do n't ; and I tell ye we do n't mean to steal it ; we 'll pay it by Monday night . ''
Lawrence made no reply , and they parted without his coming to any determination .
Here let us pause in our story .
We are almost afraid to go on .
The rest is very shocking .
Our little readers will shudder as they read .
But it is better that they should know the truth , and see what the idle boy came to at last .
In the dead of the night , Lawrence heard somebody tap at his window .
He knew well who it was , for this was the signal agreed upon between him and his wicked companion .
He trembled at the thoughts of what he was about to do , and lay quite still , with his head under the bedclothes , till he heard the second tap .
Then he got up , dressed himself , and opened his window .
It was almost even with the ground .
His companion said to him , in a hollow voice , `` Are you ready ? ''
He made no answer , but got out of the window and followed .
When he got to the stable a black cloud was just passing over the moon , and it was quite dark .
`` Where are you ? ''
whispered Lawrence , groping about , `` where are you ?
Speak to me . ''
`` I am here ; give me your hand . ''
Lawrence stretched out his hand .
`` Is that your hand ? ''
said the wicked boy , as Lawrence laid hold of him ; `` how cold it feels . ''
`` Let us go back , '' said Lawrence ; `` it is time yet . ''
`` It is no time to go back , '' replied the other , opening the door ; `` you've gone too far now to go back , '' and he pushed Lawrence into the stable .
`` Have you found it ?
Take care of the horse .
Have you done ?
What are you about ?
Make haste , I hear a noise , '' said the stable boy , who watched at the door .
`` I am feeling for the half-crown , but I ca n't find it . ''
`` Bring all together . ''
He brought Jem 's broken flower pot , with all the money in it , to the door .
The black cloud had now passed over the moon , and the light shone full upon them .
`` What do we stand here for ? ''
said the stable boy , snatching the flower-pot out of Lawrence 's trembling hands , and pulled him away from the door .
`` Good God ! ''
cried Lawrence , `` you wo n't take all .
You said you 'd only take half a crown , and pay it back on Monday .
You said you 'd only take half a crown ! ''
`` Hold your tongue , '' replied the other , walking on , deaf to all remonstrances -- '' if ever I am to be hanged , it sha'n't be for half a crown . ''
Lawrence 's blood ran cold in his veins , and he felt as if all his hair stood on end .
Not another word passed .
His accomplice carried off the money , and Lawrence crept , with all the horrors of guilt upon him , to his restless bed .
All night he was starting from frightful dreams ; or else , broad awake , he lay listening to every small noise , unable to stir , and scarcely daring to breathe -- tormented by that most dreadful of all kinds of fear , that fear which is the constant companion of an evil conscience .
He thought the morning would never come ; but when it was day , when he heard the birds sing , and saw everything look cheerful as usual , he felt still more miserable .
It was Sunday morning , and the bell rang for church .
All the children of the village , dressed in their Sunday clothes , innocent and gay , and little Jem , the best and gayest amongst them , went flocking by his door to church .
`` Well , Lawrence , '' said Jem , pulling his coat as he passed and saw Lawrence leaning against his father 's door , `` what makes you look so black ? ''
`` I ? ''
said Lawrence , starting ; `` why do you say that I look black ? ''
`` Nay , then , '' said Jem , `` you look white enough now , if that will please you , for you 're turned as pale as death . ''
`` Pale ? ''
replied Lawrence , not knowing what he said , and turned abruptly away , for he dared not stand another look of Jem 's ; conscious that guilt was written in his face , he shunned every eye .
He would now have given the world to have thrown off the load of guilt which lay upon his mind .
He longed to follow Jem , to fall upon his knees and confess all .
Dreading the moment when Jem should discover his loss , Lawrence dared not stay at home , and not knowing what to do , or where to go , he mechanically went to his old haunt at the stable yard , and lurked thereabouts all day with his accomplice , who tried in vain to quiet his fears and raise his spirits by talking of the next day 's cock-fight .
It was agreed that as soon as the dusk of the evening came on , they should go together into a certain lonely field , and there divide their booty .
In the meantime , Jem , when he returned from church , was very full of business , preparing for the reception of his mistress , of whose intended visit he had informed his mother ; and whilst she was arranging the kitchen and their little parlour , he ran to search the strawberry beds .
`` Why , my Jem , how merry you are to-day ! ''
said his mother , when he came in with the strawberries , and was jumping about the room playfully .
`` Now , keep those spirits of yours , Jem , till you want 'em , and do n't let it come upon you all at once .
Have it in mind that to-morrow 's fair day , and Lightfoot must go .
I bid Farmer Truck call for him to-night .
He said he 'd take him along with his own , and he 'll be here just now -- and then I know how it will be with you , Jem ! ''
`` So do I ! ''
cried Jem , swallowing his secret with great difficulty , and then tumbling head over heels four times running .
A carriage passed the window , and stopped at the door .
Jem ran out ; it was his mistress .
She came in smiling , and soon made the old woman smile , too , by praising the neatness of everything in the house .
We shall pass over , however important as they were deemed at the time , the praises of the strawberries , and of `` my grandmother 's china plate . ''
Another knock was heard at the door .
`` Run , Jem , '' said his mother .
`` I hope it 's our milk-woman with cream for the lady . ''
No ; it was Farmer Truck come for Lightfoot .
The old woman 's countenance fell .
`` Fetch him out , dear , '' said she , turning to her son ; but Jem was gone ; he flew out to the stable the moment he saw the flap of Farmer Truck 's great-coat .
`` Sit ye down , farmer , '' said the old woman , after they had waited about five minutes in expectation of Jem 's return .
`` You 'd best sit down , if the lady will give you leave ; for he 'll not hurry himself back again .
My boy 's a fool , madam , about that there horse . ''
Trying to laugh , she added , `` I knew how Lightfoot and he would be loath enough to part .
He wo n't bring him out till the last minute ; so do sit ye down , neighbour . ''
The farmer had scarcely sat down when Jem , with a pale , wild countenance came back .
`` What 's the matter ? ''
said his mistress .
`` God bless the boy ! ''
said his mother , looking at him quite frightened , whilst he tried to speak , but could not .
She went up to him , and then leaning his head against her , he cried , '' It 's gone ! -- it 's all gone ! ''
and , bursting into tears , he sobbed as if his little heart would break .
`` What 's gone , love ? ''
said his mother .
`` My two guineas -- Lightfoot 's two guineas .
I went to fetch 'em to give you , mammy ; but the broken flower-pot that I put them in , and all's gone ! -- quite gone ! ''
repeated he , checking his sobs .
`` I saw them safe last night , and was showing 'em to Lightfoot ; and I was so glad to think I had earned them all myself ; and I thought how surprised you 'd look , and how glad you 'd be , and how you 'd kiss me , and all ! ''
His mother listened to him with the greatest surprise , whilst his mistress stood in silence , looking first at the old woman , and then at Jem with a penetrating eye , as if she suspected the truth of his story , and was afraid of becoming the dupe of her own compassion .
`` This is a very strange thing ! ''
said she , gravely .
`` How came you to leave all your money in a broken flower-pot in the stable ?
How came you not to give it to your mother to take care of ? ''
`` Why , do n't you remember ? ''
said Jem , looking up , in the midst of his tears -- '' why , do n't you remember you , your own self , bid me not tell her about it till you were by ? ''
`` And did you not tell her ? ''
`` Nay , ask mammy , '' said Jem , a little offended ; and when afterwards the lady went on questioning him in a severe manner , as if she did not believe him , he at last made no answer .
`` Oh , Jem !
Jem !
why do n't you speak to the lady ? ''
said his mother .
`` I have spoke , and spoke the truth , '' said Jem , proudly ; `` and she did not believe me . ''
Still the lady , who had lived too long in the world to be without suspicion , maintained a cold manner , and determined to wait the event without interfering , saying only , that she hoped the money would be found , and advised Jem to have done crying .
`` I have done , '' said Jem ; `` I shall cry no more . ''
And as he had the greatest command over himself , he actually did not shed another tear , not even when the farmer got up to go , saying , he could wait no longer .
Jem silently went to bring out Lightfoot .
The lady now took her seat , where she could see all that passed at the open parlour-window .
The old woman stood at the door , and several idle people of the village , who had gathered round the lady 's carriage examining it , turned about to listen .
In a minute or two Jem appeared , with a steady countenance , leading Lightfoot and , when he came up , without saying a word , put the bridle into Farmer Truck 's hand .
`` He HAS BEEN a good horse , '' said the farmer .
`` He IS a good horse ! ''
cried Jem , and threw his arm over Lightfoot 's neck , hiding his own face as he leaned upon him .
At this instant a party of milk-women went by ; and one of them , having set down her pail , came behind Jem , and gave him a pretty smart blow upon the back .
He looked up .
`` And do n't you know me ? ''
said she .
`` I forget , '' said Jem ; `` I think I have seen your face before , but I forget . ''
`` Do you so ?
and you 'll tell me just now , '' said she , half opening her hand , `` that you forget who gave you this , and who charged you not to part with it , too . ''
Here she quite opened her large hand , and on the palm of it appeared Jem 's silver penny .
`` Where ? ''
exclaimed Jem , seizing it , `` oh , where did you find it ?
and have you -- oh , tell me , have you got the rest of my money ? ''
`` I know nothing of your money -- I do n't know what you would be at , '' said the milk-woman .
`` But where -- pray tell me where -- did you find this ? ''
`` With them that you gave it to , I suppose , '' said the milk-woman , turning away suddenly to take up her milk-pail .
But now Jem 's mistress called to her through the window , begging her to stop , and joining in his entreaties to know how she came by the silver penny .
`` Why , madam , '' said she , taking up the corner of her apron , `` I came by it in an odd way , too .
You must know my Betty is sick , so I came with the milk myself , though it 's not what I 'm used to ; for my Betty -- you know my Betty ? ''
said she , turning round to the old woman , `` my Betty serves you , and she 's a tight and stirring lassy , ma'am , I can assure -- '' '' Yes , I do n't doubt it , '' said the lady , impatiently ; `` but about the silver penny ? ''
`` Why , that 's true ; as I was coming along all alone , for the rest came round , and I came a short cut across yon field -- no , you ca n't see it , madam , where you stand -- but if you were here -- '' '' I see it -- I know it , '' said Jem , out of breath with anxiety .
`` Well -- well -- I rested my pail upon the stile , and sets me down awhile , and there comes out of the hedge -- I do n't know well how , for they startled me so I 'd liked to have thrown down my milk -- two boys , one about the size of he , '' said she pointing to Jem , `` and one a matter taller , but ill-looking like ; so I did not think to stir to make way for them , and they were like in a desperate hurry : so , without waiting for the stile , one of 'em pulled at the gate , and when it would not open ( for it was tied with a pretty stout cord ) one of 'em whips out with his knife and cuts it -- Now , have you a knife about you , sir ? ''
continued the milk woman to the farmer .
He gave her his knife .
`` Here , now , ma'am , just sticking , as it were here , between the blade and the haft , was the silver penny .
The lad took no notice ; but when he opened it , out it falls .
Still he takes no heed , but cuts the cord , as I said before , and through the gate they went , and out of sight in half a minute .
I picks up the penny , for my heart misgave me that it was the very one husband had had a long time , and had given against my voice to he , '' pointing to Jem ; `` and I charged him not to part with it ; and , ma'am , when I looked I knew it by the mark , so I thought I would show it to HE , '' again pointing to Jem , '' and let him give it back to those it belongs to . ''
`` It belongs to me , '' said Jem , `` I never gave it to anybody -- but -- '' '' But , '' cried the farmer , `` those boys have robbed him ; it is they who have all his money . ''
`` Oh , which way did they go ? ''
cried Jem , `` I 'll run after them . ''
`` No , no , '' said the lady , calling to her servant ; and she desired him to take his horse and ride after them .
`` Ay , '' added Farmer Truck , `` do you take the road , and I 'll take the field way , and I 'll be bound we 'll have 'em presently . ''
Whilst they were gone in pursuit of the thieves , the lady , who was now thoroughly convinced of Jem 's truth , desired her coachman would produce what she had ordered him to bring with him that evening .
Out of the boot of the carriage the coachman immediately produced a new saddle and bridle .
How Jem 's eyes sparkled when the saddle was thrown upon Lightfoot 's back !
`` Put it on your horse yourself , Jem , '' said the lady ; `` it is yours . ''
Confused reports of Lightfoot 's splendid accoutrements , of the pursuit of thieves , and of the fine and generous lady who was standing at Dame Preston 's window , quickly spread through the village , and drew everybody from their houses .
They crowded round Jem to hear the story .
The children especially , who were fond of him , expressed the strongest indignation against the thieves .
Every eye was on the stretch ; and now some , who had run down the lane , came back shouting , `` Here they are !
they 've got the thieves ! ''
The footman on horseback carried one boy before him ; and the farmer , striding along , dragged another .
The latter had on a red jacket , which little Jem immediately recollected , and scarcely dared lift his eyes to look at the boy on horseback .
`` Good God ! ''
said he to himself , `` it must be -- yet surely it ca n't be Lawrence ! ''
The footman rode on as fast as the people would let him .
The boy 's hat was slouched , and his head hung down , so that nobody could see his face .
At this instant there was a disturbance in the crowd .
A man who was half drunk pushed his way forwards , swearing that nobody should stop him ; that he had a right to see -- and he WOULD see .
And so he did ; for , forcing through all resistance , he staggered up to the footman just as he was lifting down the boy he had carried before him .
`` I WILL -- I tell you I WILL see the thief ! ''
cried the drunken man , pushing up the boy 's hat .
It was his own son .
`` Lawrence ! ''
exclaimed the wretched father .
The shock sobered him at once , and he hid his face in his hands .
There was an awful silence .
Lawrence fell on his knees , and in a voice that could scarcely be heard made a full confession of all the circumstances of his guilt .
`` Such a young creature so wicked ! ''
the bystanders exclaimed ; `` what could put such wickedness in your head ? ''
`` Bad company , '' said Lawrence .
`` And how came you -- what brought you into bad company ? ''
`` I do n't know , except it was idleness . ''
While this was saying the farmer was emptying Lazy Lawrence 's pockets ; and when the money appeared , all his former companions in the village looked at each other with astonishment and terror .
Their parents grasped their little hands closer , and cried , `` Thank God !
he is not my son .
How often when he was little we used , as he lounged about , to tell him that idleness was the root of all evil . ''
As for the hardened wretch , his accomplice , everyone was impatient to have him sent to gaol .
He put on a bold , insolent countenance , till he heard Lawrence 's confession ; till the money was found upon him ; and he heard the milk-woman declare that she would swear to the silver penny which he had dropped .
Then he turned pale , and betrayed the strongest signs of fear .
`` We must take him before the justice , '' said the farmer , `` and he 'll be lodged in Bristol gaol . ''
`` Oh ! ''
said Jem , springing forwards when Lawrence 's hands were going to be tied , `` let him go -- wo n't you ? -- ca n't you let him go ? ''
`` Yes , madam , for mercy 's sake , '' said Jem 's mother to the lady , `` think what a disgrace to his family to be sent to gaol . ''
His father stood by wringing his hands in an agony of despair .
`` It 's all my fault , '' cried he ; `` I brought him up in idleness . ''
`` But he 'll never be idle any more , '' said Jem ; `` wo n't you speak for him , ma'am ? ''
`` Do n't ask the lady to speak for him , '' said the farmer ; `` it 's better he should go to Bridewell now , than to the gallows by-and-by . ''
Nothing more was said ; for everybody felt the truth of the farmer's speech .
Lawrence was eventually sent to Bridewell for a month , and the stable-boy was sent for trial , convicted , and transported to Botany Bay .
During Lawrence 's confinement , Jem often visited him , and carried him such little presents as he could afford to give ; and Jem could afford to be GENEROUS , because he was INDUSTRIOUS .
Lawrence 's heart was touched by his kindness , and his example struck him so forcibly that , when his confinement was ended , he resolved to set immediately to work ; and , to the astonishment of all who knew him , soon became remarkable for industry .
He was found early and late at his work , established a new character , and for ever lost the name of `` Lazy Lawrence . ''
THE FALSE KEY .
Mr .
Spencer , a very benevolent and sensible man , undertook the education of several poor children .
Among the rest was a boy of the name of Franklin , whom he had bred up from the time he was five years old .
Franklin had the misfortune to be the son of a man of infamous character ; and for many years this was a disgrace and reproach to his child .
When any of the neighbours ' children quarrelled with him , they used to tell him that he would turn out like his father .
But Mr .
Spencer always assured him that he might make himself whatever he pleased ; that by behaving well he would certainly , sooner or later , secure the esteem and love of all who knew him , even of those who had the strongest prejudice against him on his father 's account .
This hope was very delightful to Franklin , and he showed the strongest desire to learn and to do everything that was right ; so that Mr .
Spencer soon grew fond of him , and took great pains to instruct him , and to give him all the good habits and principles which might make him a useful , respectable and happy man .
When he was about thirteen years of age , Mr .
Spencer one day sent for him into his closet ; and as he was folding up a letter which he had been writing , said to him , with a very kind look , but in a graver tone than usual , `` Franklin , you are going to leave me . ''
`` Sir ! ''
said Franklin .
`` You are now going to leave me , and to begin the world for yourself .
You will carry this letter to my sister , Mrs .
Churchill , in Queen 's Square .
You know Queen 's Square ? ''
Franklin bowed .
`` You must expect , '' continued Mr .
Spencer , `` to meet with several disagreeable things , and a great deal of rough work , at your first setting out ; but be faithful and obedient to your mistress , and obliging to your fellow-servants , and all will go well .
Mrs .
Churchill will make you a very good mistress , if you behave properly ; and I have no doubt but you will . ''
`` Thank you , sir . ''
`` And you will always -- I mean , as long as you deserve it -- find a friend in me . ''
`` Thank you , sir -- I am sure you are -- '' There Franklin stopped short , for the recollection of all Mr .
Spencer 's goodness rushed upon him at once , and he could not say another word .
`` Bring me a candle to seal this letter , '' said his master ; and he was very glad to get out of the room .
He came back with the candle , and , with a stout heart , stood by whilst the letter was sealing ; and , when his master put it into his hand , said , in a cheerful voice , `` I hope you will let me see you again , sir , sometimes . ''
`` Certainly ; whenever your mistress can spare you , I shall be very glad to see you ; and remember , if ever you get into any difficulty , do n't be afraid to come to me .
I have sometimes spoken harshly to you ; but you will not meet with a more indulgent friend . ''
Franklin at this turned away with a full heart ; and , after making two or three attempts to express his gratitude , left the room without being able to speak .
He got to Queen 's Square about three o'clock .
The door was opened by a large , red-faced man , in a blue coat and scarlet waistcoat , to whom he felt afraid to give his message , lest he should not be a servant .
`` Well , what 's your business , sir ? ''
said the butler .
`` I have a letter for Mrs .
Churchill , sir , '' said Franklin , endeavouring to pronounce his `` sir '' in a tone as respectful as the butler 's was insolent .
The man having examined the direction , seal , and edges of the letter , carried it upstairs , and in a few minutes returned , and ordered Franklin to rub his shoes well and follow him .
He was then shown into a handsome room , where he found his mistress -- an elderly lady .
She asked him a few questions , examining him attentively as she spoke ; and her severe eye at first , and her gracious smile afterwards , made him feel that she was a person to be both loved and feared .
`` I shall give you in charge , '' said she , ringing a bell , `` to my housekeeper , and I hope she will have no reason to be displeased with you . ''
The housekeeper , when she first came in , appeared with a smiling countenance ; but the moment she cast her eyes on Franklin , it changed to a look of surprise and suspicion .
Her mistress recommended him to her protection , saying , `` Pomfret , I hope you will keep this boy under your own eye . ''
And she received him with a cold `` Very well , ma'am , '' which plainly showed that she was not disposed to like him .
In fact , Mrs .
Pomfret was a woman so fond of power , and so jealous of favour , that she would have quarrelled with an angel who had got so near her mistress without her introduction .
She smothered her displeasure , however , till night ; when , as she attended her mistress ' toilette , she could not refrain from expressing her sentiments .
She began cautiously : `` Ma'am , is not this the boy Mr .
Spencer was talking of one day -- that has been brought up by the VILLAINTROPIC SOCIETY , I think they call it ? ''
`` Philanthropic Society ; yes , '' said her mistress ; `` and my brother gives him a high character : I hope he will do very well . ''
`` I 'm sure I hope so too , '' observed Mrs .
Pomfret ; `` but I ca n't say ; for my part , I 've no great notion of those low people .
They say all those children are taken from the very lowest DRUGS and REFUGES of the town , and surely they are like enough , ma'am , to take after their own fathers and mothers . ''
`` But they are not suffered to be with their parents , '' rejoined the lady ; '' and therefore can not be hurt by their example .
This little boy , to be sure , was unfortunate in his father , but he has had an excellent education . ''
`` Oh , EDICATION !
to be sure , ma'am , I know .
I do n't say but what edication is a great thing .
But then , ma'am , edication ca n't change the NATUR that 's in one , they say ; and one 's that born naturally bad and low , they say , all the edication in the world wo n't do no good ; and , for my part , ma'am , I know you knows best ; but I should be afraid to let any of those Villaintropic folks get into my house ; for nobody can tell the natur of them aforehand .
I declare it frights me . ''
`` Pomfret , I thought you had better sense : how would this poor boy earn his bread ?
he would be forced to starve or steal , if everybody had such prejudices . ''
Pomfret , who really was a good woman , was softened at this idea , and said , `` God forbid he should starve or steal , and God forbid I should say anything PREJUDICIARY of the boy ; for there may be no harm in him . ''
`` Well , '' said Mrs .
Churchill , changing her tone , `` but , Pomfret , if we do n't like the boy at the end of the month , we have done with him ; for I have only promised Mr .
Spencer to keep him a month upon trial : there is no harm done . ''
`` Dear , no , ma'am , to be sure ; and cook must put up with her disappointment , that 's all . ''
`` What disappointment ? ''
`` About her nephew , ma'am ; the boy she and I was speaking to you for . ''
`` When ? ''
`` The day you called her up about the almond pudding , ma'am .
If you remember , you said you should have no objections to try the boy ; and upon that cook bought him new shirts ; but they are to the good , as I tell her . ''
`` But I did not promise to take her nephew . ''
`` O , no ma'am , not at all ; she does not think to SAY THAT , else I should be very angry ; but the poor woman never let fall a word , any more than frets that the boy should miss such a good place . ''
`` Well , but since I did say that I should have no objection to try him , I shall keep my word ; let him come to-morrow .
Let them both have a fair trial , and at the end of the month I can decide which I like best , and which we had better keep . ''
Dismissed with these orders , Mrs .
Pomfret hastened to report all that had passed to the cook , like a favourite minister , proud to display the extent of her secret influence .
In the morning Felix , the cook 's nephew , arrived ; and , the moment he came into the kitchen , every eye , even the scullion 's , was fixed upon him with approbation , and afterwards glanced upon Franklin with contempt -- contempt which Franklin could not endure without some confusion , though quite unconscious of having deserved it ; nor , upon the most impartial and cool self-examination , could he comprehend the justice of his judges .
He perceived indeed -- for the comparisons were minutely made in audible and scornful whispers -- that Felix was a much handsomer , or as the kitchen maid expressed it , a much more genteeler gentlemanly looking like sort of person than he was ; and he was made to understand , that he wanted a frill to his shirt , a cravat , a pair of thin shoes , and , above all , shoe strings , besides other nameless advantages , which justly made his rival the admiration of the kitchen .
However , upon calling to mind all that his friend Mr .
Spencer had ever said to him , he could not recollect his having warned him that shoe strings were indispensable requisites to the character of a good servant ; so that he could only comfort himself with resolving , if possible , to make amends for these deficiencies , and to dissipate the prejudices which he saw were formed against him , by the strictest adherence to all that his tutor had taught him to be his duty .
He hoped to secure the approbation of his mistress by scrupulous obedience to all her commands , and faithful care of all that belonged to her .
At the same time he flattered himself he should win the goodwill of his fellow servants by showing a constant desire to oblige them .
He pursued this plan of conduct steadily for nearly three weeks , and found that he succeeded beyond his expectations in pleasing his mistress ; but unfortunately he found it more difficult to please his fellow servants , and he sometimes offended when he least expected it .
He had made great progress in the affections of Corkscrew , the butler , by working indeed very hard for him , and doing every day at least half his business .
But one unfortunate night the butler was gone out ; the bell rang : he went upstairs ; and his mistress asking where Corkscrew was , he answered that he was gone out .
`` Where to ! ''
said his mistress .
`` I do n't know , '' answered Franklin .
And , as he had told exactly the truth , and meant to do no harm , he was surprised , at the butler 's return , when he repeated to him what had passed , at receiving a sudden box on the ear , and the appellation of a mischievous , impertinent , mean-spirited brat .
`` Mischievous , impertinent , mean ! ''
repeated Franklin to himself ; but , looking in the butler 's face , which was a deeper scarlet than usual , he judged that he was far from sober , and did not doubt but that the next morning , when he came to the use of his reason , he would be sensible of his injustice , and apologize for his box of the ear .
But no apology coming all day , Franklin at last ventured to request an explanation , or rather , to ask what he had best do on the next occasion .
`` Why , '' said Corkscrew , `` when mistress asked for me , how came you to say I was gone out ? ''
`` Because , you know , I saw you go out . ''
`` And when she asked you where I was gone , how came you to say that you did not know ? ''
`` Because , indeed , I did not . ''
`` You are a stupid blockhead !
could you not say I was gone to the washerwoman 's ? ''
`` But WERE you ? ''
said Franklin .
`` Was I ? ''
cried Corkscrew , and looked as if he would have struck him again ; `` how dare you give me the lie , Mr .
Hypocrite ?
You would be ready enough , I 'll be bound , to make excuses for yourself .
Why are not mistress ' clogs cleaned ?
Go along and blacken 'em , this minute , and send Felix to me . ''
From this time forward Felix alone was privileged to enter the butler's pantry .
Felix became the favourite of Corkscrew ; and , though Franklin by no means sought to pry into the mysteries of their private conferences , nor ever entered without knocking at the door , yet it was his fate once to be sent of a message at an unlucky time ; and , as the door was half open , he could not avoid seeing Felix drinking a bumper of red liquor , which he could not help suspecting to be wine ; and , as the decanter , which usually went upstairs after dinner , was at this time in the butler 's grasp , without any stopper in it , he was involuntarily forced to suspect they were drinking his mistress ' wine .
Nor were the bumpers of port the only unlawful rewards which Felix received : his aunt , the cook , had occasion for his assistance , and she had many delicious douceurs in her gift .
Many a handful of currants , many a half-custard , many a triangular remnant of pie , besides the choice of his own meal at breakfast , dinner and supper , fell to the share of the favourite Felix ; whilst Franklin was neglected , though he took the utmost pains to please the cook in all honourable service , and , when she was hot , angry , or hurried , he was always at hand to help her ; and in the hour of adversity , when the clock struck five , and no dinner was dished , and no kitchen maid with twenty pair of hands was to be had , Franklin would answer to her call , with flowers to garnish her dishes , and presence of mind to know , in the midst of the commotion , where everything that was wanting was to be found ; so that , quick as lightning , all difficulties vanished before him .
Yet when the danger was over , and the hour of adversity had past , the ungrateful cook would forget her benefactor , and , when it came to his supper time , would throw him , with a carelessness that touched him sensibly , anything which the other servants were too nice to eat .
All this Franklin bore with fortitude ; nor did he envy Felix the dainties which he ate , sometimes close beside him : `` For , '' said he to himself , `` I have a clear conscience , and that is more than Felix can have .
I know how he wins cook 's favour too well , and I fancy I know how I have offended her ; for since the day I saw the basket , she has done nothing but huff me . ''
The history of the basket was this .
Mrs .
Pomfret , the housekeeper , had several times , directly and indirectly , given the world below to understand that she and her mistress thought there was a prodigious quantity of meat eaten of late .
Now , when she spoke , it was usually at dinner time ; she always looked , or Franklin imagined that she looked , suspiciously at him .
Other people looked more maliciously ; but , as he felt himself perfectly innocent , he went on eating his dinner in silence .
But at length it was time to explain .
One Sunday there appeared a handsome sirloin of beef , which before noon on Monday had shrunk almost to the bare bone , and presented such a deplorable spectacle to the opening eyes of Mrs .
Pomfret that her long smothered indignation burst forth , and she boldly declared she was now certain there had been foul play , and she would have the beef found , or she would know why .
She spoke , but no beef appeared , till Franklin , with a look of sudden recollection , cried , `` Did not I see something like a piece of beef in a basket in the dairy ? -- I think -- '' The cook , as if somebody had smote her a deadly blow , grew pale ; but , suddenly recovering the use of her speech , turned upon Franklin , and , with a voice of thunder , gave him the lie direct ; and forthwith , taking Mrs .
Pomfret by the ruffle , led the way to the dairy , declaring she could defy the world -- '' that so she could , and would . ''
`` There , ma'am , '' said she kicking an empty basket which lay on the floor -- '' there 's malice for you .
Ask him why he do n't show you the beef in the basket . ''
`` I thought I saw -- '' poor Franklin began .
`` You thought you saw ! ''
cried the cook , coming close up to him with kimboed arms , and looking like a dragon ; `` and pray , sir , what business has such a one as you to think you see ?
And pray , ma'am , will you be pleased to speak -- perhaps , ma'am , he 'll condescend to obey you -- ma'am , will you be pleased to forbid him my dairy ?
for here he comes prying and spying about ; and how , ma'am , am I to answer for my butter and cream , or anything at all ?
I 'm sure it 's what I ca n't pretend to , unless you do me the justice to forbid him my places . ''
Mrs .
Pomfret , whose eyes were blinded by her prejudices against the folks of the `` Villaintropic Society , '' and also by her secret jealousy of a boy whom she deemed to be a growing favourite of her mistress ' , took part with the cook , and ended , as she began , with a firm persuasion that Franklin was the guilty person .
`` Let him alone , let him alone ! ''
said she ; `` he has as many turns and windings as a hare ; but we shall catch him yet , I 'll be bound , in some of his doublings .
I knew the nature of him well enough , from the first time I ever set my eyes upon him ; but mistress shall have her own way , and see the end of it . ''
These words , and the bitter sense of injustice , drew tears at length fast down the proud cheek of Franklin , which might possibly have touched Mrs .
Pomfret , if Felix , with a sneer , had not called them CROCODILE TEARS .
`` Felix , too ! ''
thought he ; `` this is too much . ''
In fact , Felix had till now professed himself his firm ally , and had on his part received from Franklin unequivocal proofs of friendship ; for it must be told that every other morning , when it was Felix 's turn to get breakfast , Felix never was up in decent time , and must inevitably have come to public disgrace if Franklin had not got all the breakfast things ready for him , the bread and butter spread , and the toast toasted ; and had not , moreover , regularly , when the clock struck eight , and Mrs .
Pomfret 's foot was heard overhead , run to call the sleeping Felix , and helped him constantly through the hurry of getting dressed one instant before the housekeeper came downstairs .
All this could not but be present to his memory ; but , seeming to reproach him , Franklin wiped away his crocodile tears , and preserved a magnanimous silence .
The hour of retribution was , however , not so far off as Felix imagined .
Cunning people may go on cleverly in their devices for some time ; but although they may escape once , twice , perhaps ninety-nine times , what does that signify ? -- for the hundredth time they come to shame , and lose all their character .
Grown bold by frequent success , Felix became more careless in his operations ; and it happened that one day he met his mistress full in the passage , as he was going on one of the cook 's secret errands .
`` Where are you going , Felix ? ''
said his mistress .
`` To the washerwoman 's , ma'am , '' answered he , with his usual effrontery .
`` Very well , '' said she .
`` Call at the bookseller 's in -- stay , I must write down the direction .
Pomfret , '' said she , opening the housekeeper 's room door , `` have you a bit of paper ? ''
Pomfret came with the writing-paper , and looked very angry to see that Felix was going out without her knowledge ; so , while Mrs .
Churchill was writing the direction , she stood talking to him about it ; whilst he , in the greatest terror imaginable , looked up in her face as she spoke ; but was all the time intent on parrying on the other side the attacks of a little French dog of his mistress ' , which , unluckily for him , had followed her into the passage .
Manchon was extremely fond of Felix , who , by way of pleasing his mistress , had paid most assiduous court to her dog ; yet now his caresses were rather troublesome .
Manchon leaped up , and was not to be rebuffed .
`` Poor fellow -- poor fellow -- down !
down !
poor fellow ! ''
cried Felix , and put him away .
But Manchon leaped up again , and began smelling near the fatal pocket in a most alarming manner .
`` You will see by this direction where you are to go , '' said his mistress .
`` Manchon , come here -- and you will be so good as to bring me -- down !
down !
Manchon , be quiet ! ''
But Manchon knew better -- he had now got his head into Felix 's pocket , and would not be quiet till he had drawn from thence , rustling out of its brown paper , half a cold turkey , which had been missing since morning .
`` My cold turkey , as I 'm alive ! ''
exclaimed the housekeeper , darting upon it with horror and amazement .
`` What is all this ? ''
said Mrs .
Churchill , in a composed voice .
`` I do n't know , ma'am , '' answered Felix , so confused that he knew not what to say ; `` but -- '' '' But what ? ''
cried Mrs .
Pomfret , indignation flashing from her eyes .
`` But what ? ''
repeated his mistress , waiting for his reply with a calm air of attention , which still more disconcerted Felix ; for , though with an angry person he might have some chance of escape , he knew that he could not invent any excuse in such circumstances , which could stand the examination of a person in her sober senses .
He was struck dumb .
`` Speak , '' said Mrs .
Churchill , in a still lower tone ; `` I am ready to hear all you have to say .
In my house everybody shall have justice ; speak -- but what ? ''
`` BUT , '' stammered Felix ; and , after in vain attempting to equivocate , confessed that he was going to take the turkey to his cousin 's ; but he threw all the blame upon his aunt , the cook , who , he said , had ordered him upon this expedition .
The cook was now summoned ; but she totally denied all knowledge of the affair , with the same violence with which she had lately confounded Franklin about the beef in the basket ; not entirely , however , with the same success ; for Felix , perceiving by his mistress ' eye that she was on the point of desiring him to leave the house immediately ; and not being very willing to leave a place in which he had lived so well with the butler , did not hesitate to confront his aunt with assurance equal to her own .
He knew how to bring his charge home to her .
He produced a note in her own handwriting , the purport of which was to request her cousin's acceptance of `` some DELICATE COLD TURKEY , '' and to beg she would send her , by the return of the bearer , a little of her cherry-brandy .
Mrs .
Churchill coolly wrote upon the back of the note her cook's discharge , and informed Felix she had no further occasion for his services , but , upon his pleading with many tears , which Franklin did not call CROCODILE TEARS , that he was so young , that he was under the dominion of his aunt , he touched Mrs .
Pomfret 's compassion , and she obtained for him permission to stay till the end of the month , to give him yet a chance of redeeming his character .
Mrs .
Pomfret now seeing how far she had been imposed upon , resolved , for the future , to be more upon her guard with Felix , and felt that she had treated Franklin with great injustice , when she accused him of malpractices about the sirloin of beef .
Good people , when they are made sensible that they have treated anyone with injustice , are impatient to have an opportunity to rectify their mistake ; and Mrs .
Pomfret was now prepared to see everything which Franklin did in the most favourable point of view ; especially as the next day she discovered that it was he who every morning boiled the water for her tea , and buttered her toast -- services for which she had always thought she was indebted to Felix .
Besides , she had rated Felix's abilities very highly , because he made up her weekly accounts for her ; but unluckily once , when Franklin was out of the way , and she brought a bill in a hurry to her favourite to cast up , she discovered that he did not know how to cast up pounds , shillings and pence , and he was obliged to confess that she must wait till Franklin came home .
But , passing over a number of small incidents which gradually unfolded the character of the two boys , we must proceed to a more serious affair .
Corkscrew frequently , after he had finished taking away supper , and after the housekeeper was gone to bed , sallied forth to a neighbouring alehouse to drink with his friends .
The alehouse was kept by that cousin of Felix 's , who was so fond of `` DELICATE cold turkey , '' and who had such choice cherry-brandy .
Corkscrew kept the key of the house door , so that he could return home whenever he thought proper ; and , if he should by accident be called for by his mistress after supper , Felix knew where to find him , and did not scruple to make any of those excuses which poor Franklin had too much integrity to use .
All these precautions taken , the butler was at liberty to indulge his favourite passion , which so increased with indulgence , that his wages were by no means sufficient to support him in this way of life .
Every day he felt less resolution to break through his bad habits ; for every day drinking became more necessary to him .
His health was ruined .
With a red , pimpled , bloated face , emaciated legs , and a swelled , diseased body , he appeared the victim of intoxication .
In the morning , when he got up , his hands trembled , his spirits flagged , he could do nothing until he had taken a dram -- an operation which he was obliged to repeat several times in the course of the day , as all those wretched people MUST who once acquire this habit .
He had run up a long bill at the alehouse which he frequented ; and the landlord , who grew urgent for his money , refused to give further credit .
One night , when Corkscrew had drunk enough only to make him fretful , he leaned with his elbow surlily upon the table , began to quarrel with the landlord , and swore that he had not of late treated him like a gentleman .
To which the landlord coolly replied , `` That as long as he had paid like a gentleman , he had been treated like one , and that was as much as anyone could expect , or , at any rate , as much as anyone would meet with in this world . ''
For the truth of this assertion he appealed , laughing , to a party of men who were drinking in the room .
The men , however , took part with Corkscrew , and , drawing him over to their table , made him sit down with them .
They were in high good-humour , and the butler soon grew so intimate with them , that , in the openness of his heart , he soon communicated to them , not only all his own affairs , but all that he knew , and more than all that he knew , of his mistress ' .
His new friends were by no means uninterested by his conversation , and encouraged him as much as possible to talk ; for they had secret views , which the butler was by no means sufficiently sober to discover .
Mrs .
Churchill had some fine old family plate ; and these men belonged to a gang of housebreakers .
Before they parted with Corkscrew , they engaged him to meet them again the next night ; their intimacy was still more closely cemented .
One of the men actually offered to lend Corkscrew three guineas towards the payment of his debt , and hinted that , if he thought proper , he could easily get the whole cleared off .
Upon this hint , Corkscrew became all attention , till , after some hesitation on their part , and repeated promises of secrecy on his , they at length disclosed their plans to him .
They gave him to understand , that if he would assist in letting them into his mistress ' house , they would let him have an ample share in the booty .
The butler , who had the reputation of being an honest man , and indeed whose integrity had hitherto been proof against everything but his mistress ' port , turned pale , and trembled at this proposal ; drank two or three bumpers to drown thought ; and promised to give an answer the next day .
He went home more than half-intoxicated .
His mind was so full of what had passed , that he could not help bragging to Felix , whom he found awake at his return , that he could have his bill paid off at the alehouse whenever he pleased ; dropping , besides , some hints , which were not lost upon Felix .
In the morning Felix reminded him of the things which he had said ; and Corkscrew , alarmed , endeavoured to evade his questions , by saying that he was not in his senses when he talked in that manner .
Nothing , however , that he could urge made any impression upon Felix , whose recollection on the subject was perfectly distinct , and who had too much cunning himself , and too little confidence in his companion , to be the dupe of his dissimulation .
The butler knew not what to do when he saw that Felix was absolutely determined either to betray their scheme , or to become a sharer in the booty .
The next night came , and he was now to make a final decision ; either to determine on breaking off entirely with his new acquaintances , or taking Felix with him to join in the plot .
His debt , his love of drinking , the impossibility of indulging it without a fresh supply of money , all came into his mind at once , and conquered his remaining scruples .
It is said by those whose fatal experience gives them a right to be believed , that a drunkard will sacrifice anything , everything , sooner than the pleasure of habitual intoxication .
How much easier is it never to begin a bad custom than to break through it when once formed !
The hour of rendezvous came , and Corkscrew went to the alehouse , where he found the housebreakers waiting for him , and a glass of brandy ready poured out .
He sighed -- drank -- hesitated -- drank again -- heard the landlord talk of his bill , saw the money produced which would pay it in a moment -- drank again -- cursed himself , and , giving his hand to the villain who was whispering in his ear , swore that he could not help it , and must do as they would have him .
They required of him to give up the key of the house door , that they might get another made by it .
He had left it with Felix , and was now obliged to explain the new difficulty which had arisen .
Felix knew enough to ruin them , and must therefore be won over .
This was no very difficult task ; he had a strong desire to have some worked cravats , and the butler knew enough of him to believe that this would be a sufficient bribe .
The cravats were bought and shown to Felix .
He thought them the only things wanting to make him a complete , fine gentleman ; and to go without them , especially when he had once seen himself in the glass with one tied on in a splendid bow , appeared impossible .
Even this paltry temptation , working upon his vanity , at length prevailed with a boy whose integrity had long been corrupted by the habits of petty pilfering and daily falsehood .
It was agreed that , the first time his mistress sent him out on a message , he should carry the key of the house door to his cousin 's , and deliver it into the hands of one of the gang , who were there in waiting for it .
Such was the scheme .
Felix , the night after all this had been planned , went to bed , and fell fast asleep ; but the butler , who had not yet stifled the voice of conscience , felt , in the silence of the night , so insupportably miserable , that , instead of going to rest , he stole softly into the pantry for a bottle of his mistress ' wine , and there drinking glass after glass , he stayed till he became so far intoxicated , that , though he contrived to find his way back to bed , he could by no means undress himself .
Without any power of recollection , he flung himself upon the bed , leaving his candle half hanging out of the candlestick beside him .
Franklin slept in the next room to him , and presently awaking , thought he perceived a strong smell of something burning .
He jumped up , and seeing a light under the butler 's door , gently opened it , and to his astonishment , beheld one of the bed curtains in flames .
He immediately ran to the butler , and pulled him with all his force , to rouse him from his lethargy .
He came to his senses at length , but was so terrified , and so helpless , that , if it had not been for Franklin , the whole house would soon inevitably have been on fire .
Felix , trembling and cowardly , knew not what to do ; and it was curious to see him obeying Franklin , whose turn it now was to command .
Franklin ran upstairs to awaken Mrs .
Pomfret , whose terror of fire was so great that she came from her room almost out of her senses , whilst he , with the greatest presence of mind , recollected where he had seen two large tubs of water , which the maids had prepared the night before for their washing , and seizing the wet linen which had been left to soak , he threw them upon the flames .
He exerted himself with so much good sense , that the fire was presently extinguished .
Everything was now once more safe and quiet .
Mrs .
Pomfret , recovering from her fright , postponed all inquiries till the morning , and rejoiced that her mistress had not been awakened , whilst Corkscrew flattered himself that he should be able to conceal the true cause of the accident .
`` Do n't you tell Mrs .
Pomfret where you found the candle when you came into the room , '' said he to Franklin .
`` If she asks me , you know I must tell the truth , '' replied he .
`` Must ! ''
repeated Felix , sneeringly ; `` what , you MUST be a tell-tale ! ''
`` No , I never told any tales of anybody , and I should be very sorry to get anyone into a scrape ; but for all that I shall not tell a lie , either for myself or anybody else , let you call me what names you will . ''
`` But if I were to give you something that you would like , '' said Corkscrew -- '' something that I know you would like ! ''
repeated Felix .
`` Nothing you can give me will do , '' answered Franklin , steadily , `` so it is useless to say any more about it -- I hope I shall not be questioned . ''
In this hope he was mistaken ; for the first thing Mrs .
Pomfret did in the morning was to come into the room to examine and deplore the burnt curtains , whilst Corkscrew stood by , endeavouring to exculpate himself by all the excuses he could invent .
Mrs .
Pomfret , however , though sometimes blinded by her prejudices , was no fool ; and it was absolutely impossible to make her believe that a candle , which had been left on the hearth , where Corkscrew protested he had left it , could have set curtains on fire which were at least six feet distant .
Turning short round to Franklin , she desired that he would show her where he found the candle when he came into the room .
He took up the candlestick ; but the moment the housekeeper cast her eye upon it , she snatched it from his hands ; `` How did this candlestick come here ?
This was not the candlestick you found here last night , '' cried she .
`` Yes , indeed it was , '' answered Franklin .
`` That is impossible , '' retorted she , vehemently , `` for I left this candlestick with my own hands last night , in the hall , the last thing I did , after you , '' said she , turning to the butler , `` was gone to bed -- I 'm sure of it -- Nay , do n't you recollect my taking this JAPANNED CANDLESTICK out of your hand , and making you to go up to bed with the brass one , and I bolted the door at the stair-head after you ? ''
This was all very true ; but Corkscrew had afterwards gone down from his room by a back staircase , unbolted that door , and , upon his return from the alehouse , had taken the japanned candlestick by mistake upstairs , and had left the brass one in its stead upon the hall table .
`` Oh , ma'am , '' said Felix , `` indeed you forget ; for Mr .
Corkscrew came into my room to desire me to call him betimes in the morning , and I happened to take particular notice , and he had the japanned candlestick in his hand , and that was just as I heard you , bolting the door .
Indeed , ma'am you forget . ''
`` Indeed , sir , '' retorted Mrs .
Pomfret , rising in anger , `` I do not forget ; I 'm not come to be SUPPERANNUATED yet , I hope .
How do you dare to tell me I forget ? ''
`` Oh , ma'am , '' cried Felix , `` I beg your pardon , I did not -- I did not mean to say you forgot , but only I thought , perhaps , you might not particularly remember ; for if you please to recollect -- '' '' I wo n't please to recollect just whatever you please , sir !
Hold your tongue ; why should you poke yourself into this scrape ; what have you to do with it , I should be glad to know ? ''
`` Nothing in the world , oh nothing in the world ; I 'm sure I beg your pardon , ma'am , '' answered Felix , in a soft tone ; and , sneaking off , left his friend Corkscrew to fight his own battle , secretly resolving to desert in good time , if he saw any danger of the alehouse transactions coming to light .
Corkscrew could make but very blundering excuses for himself and , conscious of guilt , he turned pale , and appeared so much more terrified than butlers usually appear when detected in a lie , that Mrs .
Pomfret resolved , as she said , to sift the matter to the bottom .
Impatiently did she wait till the clock struck nine , and her mistress ' bell rang , the signal for her attendance at her levee .
`` How do you find yourself this morning , ma'am ? ''
said she , undrawing the curtains .
`` Very sleepy , indeed , '' answered her mistress in a drowsy voice ; `` I think I must sleep half an hour longer -- shut the curtains . ''
`` As you please , ma'am ; but I suppose I had better open a little of the window shutter , for it 's past nine . ''
`` But just struck . ''
`` Oh dear , ma'am , it struck before I came upstairs , and you know we are twenty minutes slow -- Lord bless us ! ''
exclaimed Mrs .
Pomfret , as she let fall the bar of the window , which roused her mistress .
`` I 'm sure I beg your pardon a thousand times -- it 's only the bar -- because I had this great key in my hand . ''
`` Put down the key , then , or you 'll knock something else down ; and you may open the shutters now ; for I 'm quite awake . ''
`` Dear me !
I 'm so sorry to think of disturbing you , '' cried Mrs .
Pomfret , at the same time throwing the shutters wide open ; `` but , to be sure , ma'am , I have something to tell you , which wo n't let you sleep again in a hurry .
I brought up this here key of the house door for reasons of my own , which I 'm sure you 'll approve of ; but I 'm not come to that part of my story yet .
I hope you were not disturbed by the noise in the house last night , ma'am . ''
`` I heard no noise . ''
`` I am surprised at that , though , '' continued Mrs .
Pomfret , and proceeded to give a most ample account of the fire , of her fears , and her suspicions .
`` To be sure , ma'am , what I say IS , that , without the spirit of prophecy , one can nowadays account for what has passed .
I 'm quite clear in my own judgment , that Mr .
Corkscrew must have been out last night after I went to bed ; for , besides the japanned candlestick , which of itself I 'm sure is strong enough to hang a man , there 's another circumstance , ma'am , that certifies it to me -- though I have not mentioned it , ma'am , to no one yet , '' lowering her voice -- '' Franklin , when I questioned him , told me , that he left the lantern in the outside porch in the court last night , and this morning it was on the kitchen table .
Now , ma'am , that lantern could not come without hands ; and I could not forget about that , you know ; for Franklin says , he 's sure he left the lantern out . ''
`` And do you believe HIM ? ''
inquired her mistress .
`` To be sure , ma'am -- how can I help believing him ?
I never found him out in the least symptom of a lie since ever he came into the house ; so one ca n't help believing in him , like him or not . ''
`` Without meaning to tell a falsehood , however , '' said the lady , `` he might make a mistake . ''
`` No , ma'am , he never makes mistakes ; it is not his way to go gossiping and tattling ; he never tells anything till he 's asked , and then it 's fit he should .
About the sirloin of beef , and all , he was right in the end , I found , to do him justice ; and I 'm sure he 's right now about the lantern -- he 's ALWAY 'S RIGHT '' Mrs .
Churchill could not help smiling .
`` If you had seen him , ma'am , last night in the midst of the fire -- I'm sure we may thank him that we were not burned alive in our beds -- and I shall never forget his coming to call me .
Poor fellow !
he that I was always scolding and scolding , enough to make him hate me .
But he 's too good to hate anybody ; and I 'll be bound I 'll make it up to him now . ''
`` Take care that you do n't go from one extreme into another , Pomfret ; do n't spoil the boy . ''
`` No , ma'am , there 's no danger of that ; but I 'm sure if you had seen him last night yourself , you would think he deserved to be rewarded . ''
`` And so he shall be rewarded , '' said Mrs .
Churchill ; `` but I will try him more fully yet . ''
`` There 's no occasion , I think , for trying him any more , ma'am , '' said Mrs .
Pomfret , who was as violent in her likings as in her dislikes .
`` Pray desire , '' continued her mistress , `` that he will bring up breakfast this morning ; and leave the key of the house-door , Pomfret , with me . ''
When Franklin brought the urn into the breakfast-parlour , his mistress was standing by the fire with the key in her hand .
She spoke to him of his last night 's exertions in terms of much approbation .
`` How long have you lived with me ? ''
said she , pausing ; `` three weeks , I think ? ''
`` Three weeks and four days , madam . ''
`` That is but a short time ; yet you have conducted yourself so as to make me think I may depend upon you .
You know this key ? ''
`` I believe , madam , it is the key of the house-door . ''
`` It is ; I shall trust it in your care .
It is a great trust for so young a person as you are . ''
Franklin stood silent , with a firm but modest look .
`` If you take the charge of this key , '' continued his mistress , '' remember it is upon condition that you never give it out of your own hands .
In the daytime it must not be left in the door .
You must not tell anybody where you keep it at night ; and the house-door must not be unlocked after eleven o'clock at night , unless by my orders .
Will you take charge of the key upon these conditions ? ''
`` I will , madam , do anything you order me , '' said Franklin , and received the key from her hands .
When Mrs .
Churchill 's orders were made known , they caused many secret marvellings and murmurings .
Corkscrew and Felix were disconcerted , and dared not openly avow their discontent ; and they treated Franklin with the greatest seeming kindness and cordiality .
Everything went on smoothly for three days .
The butler never attempted his usual midnight visits to the alehouse , but went to bed in proper time , and paid particular court to Mrs Pomfret , in order to dispel her suspicions .
She had never had any idea of the real fact , that he and Felix were joined in a plot with house-breakers to rob the house , but thought he only went out at irregular hours to indulge himself in his passion for drinking .
Thus stood affairs the night before Mrs .
Churchill 's birthday .
Corkscrew , by the housekeeper 's means , ventured to present a petition that he might go to the play the next day , and his request was granted .
Franklin came into the kitchen just when all the servants had gathered round the butler , who , with great importance , was reading aloud the play- bill .
Everybody present soon began to speak at once , and with great enthusiasm talked of the playhouse , the actors , and actresses ; and then Felix , in the first pause , turned to Franklin , and said , `` Lord , you know nothing of all this !
YOU never went to a play , did you ? ''
`` Never , '' said Franklin , and felt , he did not know why , a little ashamed ; and he longed extremely to go to one .
`` How should you like to go to the play with me to-morrow ? ''
said Corkscrew .
`` Oh , '' exclaimed Franklin , `` I should like it exceedingly . ''
`` And do you think mistress would let you if I asked ? ''
`` I think maybe she would , if Mrs .
Pomfret asked her . ''
`` But then you have no money , have you ? ''
`` No , '' said Franklin , sighing .
`` But stay , '' said Corkscrew , `` what I am thinking of is , that if mistress will let you go , I 'll treat you myself , rather than that you should he disappointed . ''
Delight , surprise and gratitude appeared in Franklin 's face at these words .
Corkscrew rejoiced to see that now , at least , he had found a most powerful temptation .
`` Well then , I 'll go just now and ask her .
In the meantime , lend me the key of the house door for a minute or two . ''
`` The key ! ''
answered Franklin , starting ; `` I 'm sorry , but I ca n't do that , for I 've promised my mistress never to let it out of my own hands . ''
`` But how will she know anything of the matter ?
Run , run , and get it for us . ''
`` No , I CAN NOT , '' replied Franklin , resisting the push which the butler gave his shoulder .
`` You ca n't ? ''
cried Corkscrew , changing his tone ; `` then , sir , I ca n't take you to the play . ''
`` Very well , sir , '' said Franklin , sorrowfully , but with steadiness .
`` Very well , sir , '' said Felix , mimicking him , `` you need not look so important , nor fancy yourself such a great man , because you 're master of a key . ''
`` Say no more to him , '' interrupted Corkscrew : `` let him alone to take his own way .
Felix , you would have no objection , I suppose , to going to the play with me ? ''
`` Oh , I should like it of all things , if I did not come between anybody else .
But come , come ! ''
added the hypocrite , assuming a tone of friendly persuasion , `` you wo n't be such a blockhead , Franklin , as to lose going to the play for nothing ; it 's only just obstinacy .
What harm can it do , to lend Mr .
Corkscrew the key for five minutes ?
he 'll give it to you back again safe and sound . ''
`` I do n't doubt THAT , '' answered Franklin .
`` Then it must be all because you do n't wish to oblige Mr .
Corkscrew . ''
`` No , but I ca n't oblige him in this ; for , as I told you before , my mistress trusted me .
I promised never to let the key out of my own hands , and you would not have me break my trust .
Mr .
Spencer told me that was worse than ROBBING . ''
At the word ROBBING both Corkscrew and Felix involuntarily cast down their eyes , and turned the conversation immediately , saying , that he did very right ; that they did not really want the key , and had only asked for it just to try if he would keep his word .
`` Shake hands , '' said Corkscrew , '' I am glad to find you out to be an honest fellow ! ''
`` I am sorry you did not think me an honest fellow before , Mr .
Corkscrew , '' said Franklin , giving his hand rather proudly , and he walked away .
`` We shall make no hand of this prig , '' said Corkscrew .
`` But we 'll have the key from him in spite of all his obstinacy , '' said Felix ; `` and let him make his story good as he can afterwards .
He shall repent of these airs .
To-night I 'll watch him , and find out where he hides the key ; and when he 's asleep we 'll get it without thanking him . ''
This plan Felix put into execution .
They discovered the place where Franklin kept the key at night , stole it whilst he slept , took off the impression in wax , and carefully replaced it in Franklin 's trunk , exactly where they found it .
Probably our young readers can not guess what use they could mean to make of this impression of the key in wax .
Knowing how to do mischief is very different from wishing to do it : and the most innocent persons are generally the least ignorant .
By means of the impression , which they had thus obtained , Corkscrew and Felix proposed to get a false key made by Picklock , a smith who belonged to their gang of house-breakers ; and with this false key knew they could open the door whenever they pleased .
Little suspecting what had happened , Franklin , the next morning went to unlock the house door , as usual ; but finding the key entangled in the lock , he took it out to examine it , and perceived a lump of wax sticking in one of the wards .
Struck with this circumstance , it brought to his mind all that had passed the preceding evening , and being sure that he had no wax near the key , he began to suspect what had happened ; and he could not help recollecting what he had once heard Felix say , that `` give him but a halfpenny worth of wax , and he could open the strongest lock that ever was made by hands . ''
All these things considered , Franklin resolved to take the key just as it was , with the wax sticking to it , to his mistress .
`` I was not mistaken when I thought I might trust YOU with this key , '' said Mrs .
Churchill , after she had heard his story .
`` My brother will be here to-day , and I shall consult him .
In the meantime , say nothing of what has passed . ''
Evening came , and after tea Mr .
Spencer sent for Franklin upstairs .
`` So , Mr .
Franklin , '' said he , `` I 'm glad to find you are in such high TRUST in this family . ''
Franklin bowed .
`` But you have lost , I understand , the pleasure of going to the play to-night . ''
`` I do n't think anything -- much , I mean , of that , sir , '' answered Franklin , smiling .
`` Are Corkscrew and Felix GONE to the play ? ''
`` Yes ; half an hour ago , sir . ''
`` Then I shall look into his room , and examine the pantry and the plate that is under his care . ''
When Mr .
Spencer came to examine the pantry , he found the large salvers and cups in a basket behind the door , and the other things placed so as to be easily carried off .
Nothing at first appeared in Corkscrew's bedchamber , to strengthen their suspicions , till , just as they were going to leave the room , Mrs .
Pomfret exclaimed , `` Why , if there is not Mr .
Corkscrew 's dress coat hanging up there !
and if here is n't Felix 's fine cravat that he wanted in such a hurry to go to the play !
Why , sir , they ca n't be gone to the play .
Look at the cravat .
Ah !
upon my word I am afraid they are not at the play .
No , sir , you may be sure that they are plotting with their barbarous gang at the alehouse ; and they 'll certainly break into the house to-night .
We shall all be murdered in our beds , as sure as I 'm a living woman , sir ; but if you 'll only take my advice -- '' '' Pray , good Mrs .
Pomfret , '' Mr .
Spencer observed , `` do n't be alarmed . ''
`` Nay , sir , but I wo n't pretend to sleep in the house , if Franklin isn't to have a blunderbuss , and I a BAGGONET . ''
`` You shall have both , indeed , Mrs .
Pomfret ; but do n't make such a noise , for everybody will hear you . ''
The love of mystery was the only thing which could have conquered Mrs .
Pomfret 's love of talking .
She was silent , and contented herself the rest of the evening with making signs , looking ominous , and stalking about the house like one possessed with a secret .
Escaped from Mrs .
Pomfret 's fears and advice , Mr .
Spencer went to a shop within a few doors of the alehouse , which he heard Corkscrew frequented , and sent to beg to speak to the landlord .
He came ; and , when Mr .
Spencer questioned him , confessed that Corkscrew and Felix were actually drinking in his house with two men of suspicious appearance ; that , as he passed through the passage , he heard them disputing about a key ; and that one of them said , `` Since we 've got the key , we 'll go about it to-night . ''
This was sufficient information .
Mr .
Spencer , lest the landlord should give them information of what was going forwards , took him along with him to Bow Street .
A constable and proper assistance was sent to Mrs .
Churchill 's .
They stationed themselves in a back parlour which opened on a passage leading to the butler 's pantry , where the plate was kept .
A little after midnight they heard the hall door open .
Corkscrew and his accomplices went directly to the pantry ; and there Mr .
Spencer and the constable immediately secured them , as they were carrying off their booty .
Mrs Churchill and Pomfret had spent the night at the house of an acquaintance in the same street .
`` Well , ma'am , '' said Mrs .
Pomfret , who had heard all the news in the morning , `` the villains are all safe , thank God .
I was afraid to go to the window this morning ; but it was my luck to see them all go by to gaol .
They looked so shocking !
I am sure I never shall forget Felix 's look to my dying day !
But poor Franklin !
ma'am ; that boy has the best heart in the world .
I could not get him to give a second look at them as they passed .
Poor fellow !
I thought he would have dropped ; and he was so modest , ma'am , when Mr .
Spencer spoke to him , and told him he had done his duty . ''
`` And did my brother tell him what reward I intend for him ? ''
`` No , ma'am , and I 'm sure Franklin thinks no more of REWARD than I do . ''
`` I intend , '' continued Mrs .
Churchill , `` to sell some of my old useless plate , and to lay it out in an annuity for Franklin 's life . ''
`` La , ma'am ! ''
exclaimed Mrs .
Pomfret , with unfeigned joy , `` I 'm sure you are very good ; and I 'm very glad of it . ''
`` And , '' continued Mrs .
Churchill , `` here are some tickets for the play , which I shall beg you , Pomfret , to give him , and to take him with you . ''
`` I am very much obliged to you , indeed , ma'am ; and I 'll go with him with all my heart , and choose such plays as wo n't do no prejudice to his morality .
And , ma'am , '' continued Mrs .
Pomfret , `` the night after the fire I left him my great Bible and my watch , in my will ; for I never was more mistaken at the first in any boy in my born days ; but he has won me by his own DESERTS , and I shall from this time forth love all the VILLAINTROPIC folks for his sake . ''
SIMPLE SUSAN .
CHAPTER I. Waked as her custom was , before the day , To do the observance due to sprightly May .
Dryden .
In a retired hamlet on the borders of Wales , between Oswestry and Shrewsbury , it is still the custom to celebrate the 1st of May .
The children of the village , who look forward to this rural festival with joyful eagerness , usually meet on the last day of April to make up their nosegays for the morning and to choose their queen .
Their customary place of meeting is at a hawthorn , which stands in a little green nook , open on one side to a shady lane , and separated on the other side by a thick sweet-brier and hawthorn hedge from the garden of an attorney .
This attorney began the world with nothing , but he contrived to scrape together a good deal of money , everybody knew how .
He built a new house at the entrance of the village , and had a large , well fenced garden , yet , notwithstanding his fences , he never felt himself secure .
Such were his litigious habits , and his suspicious temper , that he was constantly at variance with his simple and peaceable neighbours .
Some pig , or dog , or goat , or goose was for ever trespassing .
His complaints and his extortions wearied and alarmed the whole hamlet .
The paths in his fields were at length unfrequented , his stiles were blocked up with stones or stuffed with brambles and briers , so that not a gosling could creep under , or a giant get over them .
Indeed , so careful were even the village children of giving offence to this irritable man of the law , that they would not venture to fly a kite near his fields lest it should entangle in his trees , or fall upon his meadow .
Mr .
Case , for this was the name of our attorney , had a son and a daughter , to whose education he had not time to attend , as his whole soul was intent upon accumulating for them a fortune .
For several years he suffered his children to run wild in the village ; but suddenly , on his being appointed to a considerable agency , he began to think of making his children a little genteel .
He sent his son to learn Latin ; he hired a maid to wait upon his daughter Barbara ; and he strictly forbade her thenceforward to keep company with any of the poor children , who had hitherto been her playfellows .
They were not sorry for this prohibition , because she had been their tyrant rather than their companion .
She was vexed to observe that her absence was not regretted , and she was mortified to perceive that she could not humble them by any display of airs and finery .
There was one poor girl , amongst her former associates , to whom she had a peculiar dislike , -- Susan Price , a sweet tempered , modest , sprightly , industrious lass , who was the pride and delight of the village .
Her father rented a small farm , and , unfortunately for him , he lived near Attorney Case .
Barbara used often to sit at her window , watching Susan at work .
Sometimes she saw her in the neat garden raking the beds , or weeding the borders ; sometimes she was kneeling at her beehive with fresh flowers for her bees ; sometimes she was in the poultry yard , scattering corn from her sieve amongst the eager chickens ; and in the evening she was often seated in a little honeysuckle arbour , with a clean , light , three-legged deal table before her , upon which she put her plain work .
Susan had been taught to work neatly by her good mother , who was very fond of her , and to whom she was most gratefully attached .
Mrs .
Price was an intelligent , active , domestic woman ; but her health was not robust .
She earned money , however , by taking in plain work ; and she was famous for baking excellent bread and breakfast cakes .
She was respected in the village , for her conduct as a wife and as a mother , and all were eager to show her attention .
At her door the first branch of hawthorn was always placed on May morning , and her Susan was usually Queen of the May .
It was now time to choose the Queen .
The setting sun shone full upon the pink blossoms of the hawthorn , when the merry group assembled upon their little green .
Barbara was now walking in sullen state in her father's garden .
She heard the busy voices in the lane , and she concealed herself behind the high hedge , that she might listen to their conversation .
`` Where 's Susan ? ''
were the first unwelcome words which she overheard .
`` Ay , where 's Susan ? ''
repeated Philip , stopping short in the middle of a new tune that he was playing on his pipe .
`` I wish Susan would come !
I want her to sing me this same tune over again ; I have not it yet . ''
`` And I wish Susan would come , I 'm sure , '' cried a little girl , whose lap was full of primroses .
`` Susan will give me some thread to tie up my nosegays , and she 'll show me where the fresh violets grow ; and she has promised to give me a great bunch of her double cowslips to wear to- morrow .
I wish she would come . ''
`` Nothing can be done without Susan !
She always shows us where the nicest flowers are to be found in the lanes and meadows , '' said they .
`` She must make up the garlands ; and she shall be Queen of the May ! ''
exclaimed a multitude of little voices .
`` But she does not come ! ''
said Philip .
Rose , who was her particular friend , now came forward to assure the impatient assembly , `` that she would answer for it Susan would come as soon as she possibly could , and that she probably was detained by business at home . ''
The little electors thought that all business should give way to theirs , and Rose was dispatched to summon her friend immediately .
`` Tell her to make haste , '' cried Philip .
`` Attorney Case dined at the Abbey to-day -- luckily for us .
If he comes home and finds us here , maybe he 'll drive us away ; for he says this bit of ground belongs to his garden : though that is not true , I 'm sure ; for Farmer Price knows , and says , it was always open to the road .
The Attorney wants to get our playground , so he does .
I wish he and his daughter Bab , or Miss Barbara , as she must now be called , were a hundred miles off , out of our way , I know .
No later than yesterday she threw down my nine-pins in one of her ill-humours , as she was walking by with her gown all trailing in the dust . ''
`` Yes , '' cried Mary , the little primrose-girl , `` her gown is always trailing .
She does not hold it up nicely , like Susan ; and with all her fine clothes she never looks half so neat .
Mamma says she wishes I may be like Susan , when I grow up to be a great girl , and so do I. I should not like to look conceited as Barbara does , if I was ever so rich . ''
`` Rich or poor , '' said Philip , `` it does not become a girl to look conceited , much less BOLD , as Barbara did the other day , when she was at her father 's door without a hat upon her head , staring at the strange gentleman who stopped hereabout to let his horse drink .
I know what he thought of Bab by his looks , and of Susan , too ; for Susan was in her garden , bending down a branch of the laburnum-tree , looking at its yellow flowers , which were just come out ; and when the gentleman asked her how many miles it was from Shrewsbury , she answered him so modest ! -- not bashful , like as if she had never seen nobody before -- but just right ; and then she pulled on her straw hat , which was fallen back with her looking up at the laburnum , and she went her ways home ; and the gentleman says to me , after she was gone , 'Pray , who is that neat , modest girl -- ? '
But I wish Susan would come , '' cried Philip , interrupting himself , Susan was all this time , as her friend Rose rightly guessed , busy at home .
She was detained by her father 's returning later than usual .
His supper was ready for him nearly an hour before he came home ; and Susan swept up the ashes twice , and twice put on wood to make a cheerful blaze for him ; but at last , when he did come in , he took no notice of the blaze or of Susan ; and when his wife asked him how he did , he made no answer , but stood with his back to the fire , looking very gloomy .
Susan put his supper upon the table , and set his own chair for him ; but he pushed away the chair and turned from the table , saying -- '' I shall eat nothing , child !
Why have you such a fire to roast me at this time of the year ? ''
`` You said yesterday , father , I thought , that you liked a little cheerful wood fire in the evening ; and there was a great shower of hail ; your coat is quite wet , we must dry it . ''
`` Take it , then , child , '' said he , pulling it off -- '' I shall soon have no coat to dry -- and take my hat , too , '' said he , throwing it upon the ground .
Susan hung up his hat , put his coat over the back of a chair to dry , and then stood anxiously looking at her mother , who was not well ; she had this day fatigued herself with baking ; and now , alarmed by her husband's moody behaviour , she sat down pale and trembling .
He threw himself into a chair , folded his arms , and fixed his eyes upon the fire .
Susan was the first who ventured to break silence .
Happy the father who has such a daughter as Susan ! -- her unaltered sweetness of temper , and her playful , affectionate caresses , at last somewhat dissipated her father's melancholy .
He could not be prevailed upon to eat any of the supper which had been prepared for him ; however , with a faint smile , he told Susan that he thought he could eat one of her guinea-hen 's eggs .
She thanked him , and with that nimble alacrity which marks the desire to please , she ran to her neat chicken-yard ; but , alas ! , her guinea-hen was not there -- it had strayed into the attorney 's garden .
She saw it through the paling , and timidly opening the little gate , she asked Miss Barbara , who was walking slowly by , to let her come in and take her guinea-hen .
Barbara , who was at this instant reflecting , with no agreeable feelings , upon the conversation of the village children , to which she had recently listened , started when she heard Susan 's voice , and with a proud , ill-humoured look and voice , refused her request .
`` Shut the gate , '' said Barbara , `` you have no business in our garden ; and as for your hen , I shall keep it ; it is always flying in here , and plaguing us , and my father says it is a trespasser ; and he told me I might catch it and keep it the next time it got in , and it is in now . ''
Then Barbara called to her maid , Betty , and bid her catch the mischievous hen .
`` Oh , my guinea-hen !
my pretty guinea-hen ! ''
cried Susan , as they hunted the frightened , screaming creature from corner to corner .
`` Here we have got it ! ''
said Betty , holding it fast by the legs .
`` Now pay damages , Queen Susan , or good-bye to your pretty guinea-hen , '' said Barbara , in an insulting tone .
`` Damages !
what damages ? ''
said Susan ; `` tell me what I must pay . ''
`` A shilling , '' said Barbara .
`` Oh , if sixpence would do ! ''
said Susan ; `` I have but sixpence of my own in the world , and here it is . ''
`` It wo n't do , '' said Barbara , turning her back .
`` Nay , but hear me , '' cried Susan ; `` let me at least come in to look for its eggs .
I only want ONE for my father 's supper ; you shall have all the rest . ''
`` What 's your father , or his supper to us ?
is he so nice that he can eat none but guinea-hen 's eggs ? ''
said Barbara .
`` If you want your hen and your eggs , pay for them , and you 'll have them . ''
`` I have but sixpence , and you say that wo n't do , '' said Susan with a sigh , as she looked at her favourite , which was in the maid 's grasping hands , struggling and screaming in vain .
Susan retired disconsolate .
At the door of her father 's cottage she saw her friend Rose , who was just come to summon her to the hawthorn bush .
`` They are all at the hawthorn , and I am come for you .
We can do nothing without YOU , dear Susan , '' cried Rose , running to meet her , at the moment she saw her .
`` You are chosen Queen of the May -- come , make haste .
But what is the matter ?
why do you look so sad ? ''
`` Ah ! ''
said Susan , `` do n't wait for me ; I ca n't come to you , but , '' added she , pointing to the tuft of double cowslips in the garden , `` gather those for poor little Mary ; I promised them to her , and tell her the violets are under a hedge just opposite the turnstile , on the right as we go to church .
Good-bye !
never mind me ; I ca n't come -- I ca n't stay , for my father wants me . ''
`` But do n't turn away your face ; I wo n't keep you a moment ; only tell me what 's the matter , '' said her friend , following her into the cottage .
`` Oh , nothing , not much , '' said Susan ; `` only that I wanted the egg in a great hurry for father , it would not have vexed me -- to be sure I should have clipped my guinea-hen 's wings , and then she could not have flown over the hedge ; but let us think no more about it , now , '' added she , twinkling away a tear .
When Rose , however , learnt that her friend 's guinea-hen was detained prisoner by the attorney 's daughter , she exclaimed , with all the honest warmth of indignation , and instantly ran back to tell the story to her companions .
`` Barbara !
ay ; like father , like daughter , '' cried Farmer Price , starting from the thoughtful attitude in which he had been fixed , and drawing his chair closer to his wife .
`` You see something is amiss with me , wife -- I 'll tell you what it is . ''
As he lowered his voice , Susan , who was not sure that he wished she should hear what he was going to say , retired from behind his chair .
`` Susan , do n't go ; sit you down here , my sweet Susan , '' said he , making room for her upon his chair ; `` I believe I was a little cross when I came in first tonight ; but I had something to vex me , as you shall hear .
`` About a fortnight ago , you know , wife , '' continued he , `` there was a balloting in our town for the militia ; now at that time I wanted but ten days of forty years of age ; and the attorney told me I was a fool for not calling myself plump forty .
But the truth is the truth , and it is what I think fittest to be spoken at all times come what will of it .
So I was drawn for a militiaman ; but when I thought how loth you and I would be to part , I was main glad to hear that I could get off by paying eight or nine guineas for a substitute -- only I had not the nine guineas -- for , you know , we had bad luck with our sheep this year , and they died away one after another -- but that was no excuse , so I went to Attorney Case , and , with a power of difficulty , I got him to lend me the money ; for which , to be sure , I gave him something , and left my lease of our farm with him , as he insisted upon it , by way of security for the loan .
Attorney Case is too many for me .
He has found what he calls a flaw in my lease ; and the lease , he tells me , is not worth a farthing , and that he can turn us all out of our farm to-morrow if he pleases ; and sure enough he will please , for I have thwarted him this day , and he swears he 'll be revenged of me .
Indeed , he has begun with me badly enough already .
I 'm not come to the worst part of my story yet -- '' Here Farmer Price made a dead stop ; and his wife and Susan looked up in his face , breathless with anxiety .
`` It must come out , '' said he , with a short sigh ; `` I must leave you in three days , wife . ''
`` Must you ? ''
said his wife , in a faint , resigned voice .
`` Susan , love , open the window . ''
Susan ran to open the window , and then returned to support her mother 's head .
When she came a little to herself she sat up , begged that her husband would go on , and that nothing might be concealed from her .
Her husband had no wish indeed to conceal anything from a wife he loved so well ; but , firm as he was , and steady to his maxim , that the truth was the thing the fittest to be spoken at all times , his voice faltered , and it was with great difficulty that he brought himself to speak the whole truth at this moment .
The fact was this .
Case met Farmer Price as he was coming home , whistling , from a new ploughed field .
The attorney had just dined at The Abbey .
The Abbey was the family seat of an opulent baronet in the neighbourhood , to whom Mr .
Case had been agent .
The baronet died suddenly , and his estate and title devolved to a younger brother , who was now just arrived in the country , and to whom Mr .
Case was eager to pay his court , in hopes of obtaining his favour .
Of the agency he flattered himself that he was pretty secure ; and he thought that he might assume the tone of command towards the tenants , especially towards one who was some guineas in debt , and in whose lease there was a flaw .
Accosting the farmer in a haughty manner , the attorney began with , `` So , Farmer Price , a word with you , if you please .
Walk on here , man , beside my horse , and you 'll hear me .
You have changed your opinion , I hope , about that bit of land -- that corner at the end of my garden ? ''
`` As how , Mr .
Case ? ''
said the farmer .
`` As how , man !
Why , you said something about its not belonging to me , when you heard me talk of inclosing it the other day . ''
`` So I did , '' said Price , `` and so I do . ''
Provoked and astonished at the firm tone in which these words were pronounced , the attorney was upon the point of swearing that he would have his revenge ; but , as his passions were habitually attentive to the LETTER of the law , he refrained from any hasty expression , which might , he was aware , in a court of justice , be hereafter brought against him .
`` My good friend , Mr .
Price , '' said he , in a soft voice , and pale with suppressed rage .
He forced a smile .
`` I 'm under the necessity of calling in the money I lent you some time ago , and you will please to take notice , that it must be paid to-morrow morning .
I wish you a good evening .
You have the money ready for me , I daresay . ''
`` No , '' said the farmer , `` not a guinea of it ; but John Simpson , who was my substitute , has not left our village yet .
I 'll get the money back from him , and go myself , if so be it must be so , into the militia -- so I will . ''
The attorney did not expect such a determination , and he represented , in a friendly , hypocritical tone to Price , that he had no wish to drive him to such an extremity ; that it would be the height of folly in him TO RUN HIS HEAD AGAINST A WALL FOR NO PURPOSE .
`` You do n't mean to take the corner into your own garden , do you , Price ? ''
said he .
`` I ? ''
said the farmer , `` God forbid !
it 's none of mine , I never take what does not belong to me . ''
`` True , right , very proper , of course , '' said Mr .
Case ; `` but then you have no interest in life in the land in question ? ''
`` None . ''
`` Then why so stiff about it , Price ?
All I want of you to say -- '' '' To say that black is white , which I wo n't do , Mr .
Case .
The ground is a thing not worth talking of ; but it 's neither yours nor mine .
In my memory , since the NEW lane was made , it has always been open to the parish ; and no man shall inclose it with my good-will .
Truth is truth , and must be spoken ; justice is justice , and should be done , Mr .
Attorney . ''
`` And law is law , Mr .
Farmer , and shall have its course , to your cost , '' cried the attorney , exasperated by the dauntless spirit of this village Hampden .
Here they parted .
The glow of enthusiasm , the pride of virtue , which made our hero brave , could not render him insensible .
As he drew nearer home , many melancholy thoughts pressed upon his heart .
He passed the door of his own cottage with resolute steps , however , and went through the village in search of the man who had engaged to be his substitute .
He found him , told him how the matter stood ; and luckily the man , who had not yet spent the money , was willing to return it ; as there were many others drawn for the militia , who , he observed , would be glad to give him the same price , or more , for his services .
The moment Price got the money , he hastened to Mr .
Case 's house , walked straight forward into his room , and laying the money down upon his desk , '' There , Mr .
Attorney , are your nine guineas ; count them ; now I have done with you . ''
`` Not yet , '' said the attorney , jingling the money triumphantly in his hand .
`` We 'll give you a taste of the law , my good sir , or I 'm mistaken .
You forgot the flaw in your lease , which I have safe in this desk . ''
`` Ah , my lease , '' said the farmer , who had almost forgot to ask for it till he was thus put in mind of it by the attorney 's imprudent threat .
`` Give me my lease , Mr .
Case .
I 've paid my money ; you have no right to keep the lease any longer , whether it is a bad one or a good one . ''
`` Pardon me , '' said the attorney , locking his desk , and putting the key into his pocket , `` possession , my honest friend , '' cried he , striking his hand upon the desk , `` is nine points of the law .
Good night to you .
I can not in conscience return a lease to a tenant in which I know there is a capital flaw .
It is my duty to show it to my employer ; or , in other words , to your new landlord , whose agent I have good reasons to expect I shall be ; you will live to repent your obstinacy , Mr .
Price .
Your servant , sir . ''
Price retired with melancholy feelings , but not intimidated .
Many a man returns home with a gloomy countenance , who has not quite so much cause for vexation .
When Susan heard her father 's story , she quite forgot her guinea-hen , and her whole soul was intent upon her poor mother , who , notwithstanding her utmost exertion , could not support herself under this sudden stroke of misfortune .
In the middle of the night Susan was called up ; her mother 's fever ran high for some hours ; but towards morning it abated , and she fell into a soft sleep with Susan 's hand locked fast in hers .
Susan sat motionless , and breathed softly , lest she should disturb her .
The rushlight , which stood beside the bed , was now burnt low ; the long shadow of the tall wicker chair flitted , faded , appeared , and vanished , as the flame rose and sunk in the socket .
Susan was afraid that the disagreeable smell might waken her mother ; and , gently disengaging her hand , she went on tiptoe to extinguish the candle .
All was silent : the grey light of the morning was now spreading over every object ; the sun rose slowly , and Susan stood at the lattice window , looking through the small leaded , cross-barred panes at the splendid spectacle .
A few birds began to chirp ; but , as Susan was listening to them , her mother started in her sleep , and spoke unintelligibly .
Susan hung up a white apron before the window to keep out the light , and just then she heard the sound of music at a distance in the village .
As it approached nearer , she knew that it was Philip playing upon his pipe and tabor .
She distinguished the merry voices of her companions `` carolling in honour of the May , '' and soon she saw them coming towards her father 's cottage , with branches and garlands in their hands .
She opened quick , but gently , the latch of the door , and ran out to meet them .
`` Here she is ! -- here 's Susan ! ''
they exclaimed , joyfully .
`` Here 's the Queen of the May . ''
`` And here 's her crown ! ''
cried Rose , pressing forward ; but Susan put her finger upon her lips , and pointed to her mother's window .
Philip 's pipe stopped instantly .
`` Thank you , '' said Susan , `` my mother is ill ; I ca n't leave her , you know . ''
Then gently putting aside the crown , her companions bid her say who should wear it for her .
`` Will you , dear Rose ? ''
said she , placing the garland upon her friend's head .
`` It 's a charming May morning , '' added she , with a smile ; `` good-bye .
We sha'n't hear your voices or the pipe when you have turned the corner into the village ; so you need only stop till then , Philip . ''
`` I shall stop for all day , '' said Philip : `` I 've no mind to play any more . ''
`` Good-bye , poor Susan .
It is a pity you ca n't come with us , '' said all the children ; and little Mary ran after Susan to the cottage door .
`` I forgot to thank you , '' said she , `` for the double cowslips ; look how pretty they are , and smell how sweet the violets are in my bosom , and kiss me quick , for I shall be left behind . ''
Susan kissed the little breathless girl , and returned softly to the side of her mother 's bed .
`` How grateful that child is to me , for a cowslip only !
How can I be grateful enough to such a mother as this ? ''
said Susan to herself , as she bent over her sleeping mother 's pale countenance .
Her mother 's unfinished knitting lay upon a table near the bed , and Susan sat down in her wicker arm-chair , and went on with the row , in the middle of which her hand stopped the preceding evening .
`` She taught me to knit , she taught me everything that I know , '' thought Susan , `` and the best of all , she taught me to love her , to wish to be like her . ''
Her mother , when she awakened , felt much refreshed by her tranquil sleep , and observing that it was a delightful morning , said , `` that she had been dreaming she heard music ; but that the drum frightened her , because she thought it was the signal for her husband to be carried away by a whole regiment of soldiers , who had pointed their bayonets at him .
But that was but a dream , Susan ; I awoke , and knew it was a dream , and I then fell asleep , and have slept soundly ever since . ''
How painful it is to awake to the remembrance of misfortune .
Gradually as this poor woman collected her scattered thoughts , she recalled the circumstances of the preceding evening .
She was too certain that she had heard from her husband 's own lips the words , `` I MUST LEAVE YOU IN THREE DAYS '' ; and she wished that she could sleep again , and think it all a dream .
`` But he 'll want , he 'll want a hundred things , '' said she , starting up .
`` I must get his linen ready for him .
I 'm afraid it 's very late .
Susan , why did you let me lie so long ? ''
`` Everything shall be ready , dear mother ; only do n't hurry yourself , '' said Susan .
And indeed her mother was ill able to bear any hurry , or to do any work this day .
Susan 's affectionate , dexterous , sensible activity was never more wanted , or more effectual .
She understood so readily , she obeyed so exactly ; and when she was left to her own discretion , judged so prudently , that her mother had little trouble and no anxiety in directing her .
She said that Susan never did too little , or too much .
Susan was mending her father 's linen , when Rose tapped softly at the window , and beckoned to her to come out .
She went out .
`` How does your mother do , in the first place ? ''
said Rose .
`` Better , thank you . ''
`` That 's well , and I have a little bit of good news for you besides -- here , '' said she , pulling out a glove , in which there was money , `` we'll get the guinea-hen back again -- we have all agreed about it .
This is the money that has been given to us in the village this May morning .
At every door they gave silver .
See how generous they have been -- twelve shillings , I assure you .
Now we are a match for Miss Barbara .
You won't like to leave home ; I 'll go to Barbara , and you shall see your guinea-hen in ten minutes . ''
Rose hurried away , pleased with her commission , and to accomplish her business .
Miss Barbara 's maid Betty was the first person that was visible at the attorney 's house .
Rose insisted upon seeing Miss Barbara herself , and she was shown into a parlour to the young lady , who was reading a dirty novel , which she put under a heap of law papers as they entered .
`` Dear , how you STARTLED me !
Is it only you ? ''
said she to her maid ; but as soon as she saw Rose behind the maid , she put on a scornful air .
`` Could not ye say I was not at home , Betty ?
Well , my good girl , what brings you here ?
Something to borrow or beg , I suppose . ''
May every ambassador -- every ambassador in as good a cause -- answer with as much dignity and moderation as Rose replied to Barbara upon the present occasion .
She assured her , that the person from whom she came did not send her either to beg or borrow ; that she was able to pay the full value of that for which she came to ask ; and , producing her well filled purse , '' I believe that this is a very good shilling , '' said she .
`` If you don't like it , I will change it , and now you will be so good as to give me Susan 's guinea-hen .
It is in her name I ask for it . ''
`` No matter in whose name you ask for it , '' replied Barbara , `` you will not have it .
Take up your shilling , if you please .
I would have taken a shilling yesterday , if it had been paid at the time properly ; but I told Susan , that if it was not paid then , I should keep the hen , and so I shall , I promise her .
You may go back , and tell her so . ''
The attorney 's daughter had , whilst Rose opened her negotiation , measured the depth of her purse with a keen eye ; and her penetration discovered that it contained at least ten shillings .
With proper management she had some hopes that the guinea-hen might be made to bring in at least half the money .
Rose , who was of a warm temper , not quite so fit a match as she had thought herself for the wily Barbara , incautiously exclaimed , `` Whatever it costs us , we are determined to have Susan 's favourite hen ; so , if one shilling wo n't do , take two ; and if two wo n't do , why , take three . ''
The shillings sounded provoking upon the table , as she threw them down one after another , and Barbara coolly replied , `` Three wo n't do . ''
`` Have you no conscience , Miss Barbara ?
Then take four . ''
Barbara shook her head .
A fifth shilling was instantly proffered ; but Bab , who now saw plainly that she had the game in her own hands , preserved a cold , cruel silence .
Rose went on rapidly , bidding shilling after shilling , till she had completely emptied her purse .
The twelve shillings were spread upon the table .
Barbara 's avarice was moved , she consented for this ransom to liberate her prisoner .
Rose pushed the money towards her ; but just then , recollecting that she was acting for others more than for herself , and doubting whether she had full powers to conclude such an extravagant bargain , she gathered up the public treasure , and with newly-recovered prudence observed that she must go back to consult her friends .
Her generous little friends were amazed at Barbara 's meanness , but with one accord declared that they were most willing , for their parts , to give up every farthing of the money .
They all went to Susan in a body , and told her so .
`` There 's our purse , '' said they ; `` do what you please with it . ''
They would not wait for one word of thanks , but ran away , leaving only Rose with her to settle the treaty for the guinea-hen .
There is a certain manner of accepting a favour , which shows true generosity of mind .
Many know how to give , but few know how to accept a gift properly .
Susan was touched , but not astonished , by the kindness of her young friends , and she received the purse with as much simplicity as she would have given it .
`` Well , '' said Rose , `` shall I go back for the guinea-hen ? ''
`` The guinea-hen ! ''
said Susan , starting from a reverie into which she had fallen , as she contemplated the purse .
`` Certainly I DO long to see my pretty guinea-hen once more ; but I was not thinking of her just then -- I was thinking of my father . ''
Now Susan had heard her mother often , in the course of this day , wish that she had but money enough in the world to pay John Simpson for going to serve in the militia instead of her husband .
`` This , to be sure , will go but a little way , '' thought Susan ; `` but still it may be of some use to my father . ''
She told her mind to Rose , and concluded by saying , decidedly , that `` if the money was given to her to dispose of as she pleased , she would give it to her father . ''
`` It is all yours , my dear , good Susan , '' cried Rose , with a look of warm approbation .
`` This is so like you -- but I 'm sorry that Miss Bab must keep your guinea-hen .
I would not be her for all the guinea-hens , or guineas either , in the whole world .
Why , I 'll answer for it , the guinea-hen wo n't make her happy , and you 'll be happy EVEN without ; because you are good .
Let me come and help you to-morrow , '' continued she , looking at Susan 's work , `` if you have any more mending work to do -- I never liked work till I worked with you .
I wo n't forget my thimble or my scissors , '' added she , laughing -- '' though I used to forget them when I was a giddy girl .
I assure you I am a great hand at my needle , now -- try me . ''
Susan assured her friend that she did not doubt the powers of her needle , and that she would most willingly accept of her services , but that UNLUCKILY she had finished all the needle work immediately wanted .
`` But do you know , '' said she , `` I shall have a great deal of business to- morrow ; but I wo n't tell you what it is that I have to do , for I am afraid I shall not succeed ; but if I do succeed , I 'll come and tell you directly , because you will be so glad of it . ''
Susan , who had always been attentive to what her mother taught her , and who had often assisted her when she was baking bread and cakes for the family at the Abbey , had now formed the courageous , but not presumptuous idea , that she could herself undertake to bake a batch of bread .
One of the servants from the Abbey had been sent all round the village in the morning in search of bread , and had not been able to procure any that was tolerable .
Mrs .
Price 's last baking failed for want of good barm .
She was not now strong enough to attempt another herself ; and when the brewer 's boy came with eagerness to tell her that he had some fine fresh yeast , she thanked him , but sighed , and said it would be of no use to her .
Accordingly she went to work with much prudent care , and when her bread the next morning came out of the oven , it was excellent ; at least her mother said so , and she was a good judge .
It was sent to the Abbey ; and as the family there had not tasted any good bread since their arrival in the country , they also were earnest and warm in its praise .
Inquiries were made from the housekeeper , and they heard , with some surprise , that this excellent bread was made by a young girl only twelve years old .
The housekeeper , who had known Susan from a child , was pleased to have an opportunity in speaking in her favour .
`` She is the most industrious little creature , ma'am , in the world , '' said she to her mistress .
`` Little I ca n't so well call her now , since she 's grown tall and slender to look at ; and glad I am she is grown up likely to look at ; for handsome is that handsome does ; she thinks no more of her being handsome than I do myself ; yet she has as proper a respect for herself , ma'am , as you have ; and I always see her neat , and with her mother , ma'am , or fit people , as a girl should be .
As for her mother , she dotes upon her , as well she may ; for I should myself if I had half such a daughter ; and then she has two little brothers ; and she 's as good to them , and , my boy Philip says , taught 'em to read more than the school-mistress , all with tenderness and good nature ; but , I beg your pardon , ma'am , I can not stop myself when I once begin to talk of Susan . ''
`` You have really said enough to excite my curiosity , '' said her mistress ; '' pray send for her immediately ; we can see her before we go out to walk . ''
The benevolent housekeeper despatched her boy Philip for Susan , who never happened to be in such an UNTIDY state as to be unable to obey a summons without a long preparation .
She had , it is true , been very busy ; but orderly people can be busy and neat at the same time .
She put on her usual straw hat , and accompanied Rose 's mother , who was going with a basket of cleared muslin to the Abbey .
The modest simplicity of Susan 's appearance and the artless propriety of the answers she gave to all the questions that were asked her , pleased the ladies at the Abbey , who were good judges of character and manners .
Sir Arthur Somers had two sisters , sensible , benevolent women .
They were not of that race of fine ladies who are miserable the moment they come to THE COUNTRY ; nor yet were they of that bustling sort , who quack and direct all their poor neighbours , for the mere love of managing , or the want of something to do .
They were judiciously generous ; and whilst they wished to diffuse happiness , they were not peremptory in requiring that people should be happy precisely their own way .
With these dispositions , and with a well informed brother , who , though he never wished to direct , was always willing to assist in their efforts to do good , there were reasonable hopes that these ladies would be a blessing to the poor villagers amongst whom they were now settled .
As soon as Miss Somers had spoken to Susan , she inquired for her brother ; but Sir Arthur was in his study , and a gentleman was with him on business .
Susan was desirous of returning to her mother , and the ladies therefore would not detain her .
Miss Somers told her , with a smile , when she took leave , that she would call upon her in the evening at six o'clock .
It was impossible that such a grand event as Susan 's visit to the Abbey could long remain unknown to Barbara Case and her gossiping maid .
They watched eagerly for the moment of her return , that they might satisfy their curiosity .
`` There she is , I declare , just come into her garden , '' cried Bab ; `` I 'll run in and get it all out of her in a minute . ''
Bab could descend , without shame , whenever it suited her purposes , from the height of insolent pride to the lowest meanness of fawning familiarity .
Susan was gathering some marigolds and some parsley for her mother's broth .
`` So , Susan , '' said Bab , who came close up to her before she perceived it , '' how goes the world with you to-day ? ''
`` My mother is rather better to-day , she says , ma'am -- thank you , '' replies Susan , coldly but civilly .
`` MA'AM !
dear , how polite we are grown of a sudden ! ''
cried Bab , winking at her maid .
`` One may see you 've been in good company this morning -- hey , Susan ?
Come , let 's hear about it . ''
`` Did you see the ladies themselves , or was it only the housekeeper sent for you ? ''
said the maid .
`` What room did you go into ? ''
continued Bab .
`` Did you see Miss Somers , or Sir Arthur ? ''
`` Miss Somers . ''
`` La !
she saw Miss Somers !
Betty , I must hear about it .
Ca n't you stop gathering those things for a minute , and chat a bit with us , Susan ? ''
`` I ca n't stay , indeed , Miss Barbara ; for my mother 's broth is just wanted , and I 'm in a hurry . ''
Susan ran home .
`` Lord , her head is full of broth now , '' said Bab to her maid ; `` and she has not a word for herself , though she has been abroad .
My papa may well call her Simple Susan ; for simple she is , and simple she will be , all the world over .
For my part , I think she 's little better than a downright simpleton .
But , however , simple or not , I 'll get what I want out of her .
She 'll be able to speak , maybe , when she has settled the grand matter of the broth .
I 'll step in and ask to see her mother , that will put her in a good humour in a trice . ''
Barbara followed Susan into the cottage , and found her occupied with the grand affair of the broth .
`` Is it ready ? ''
said Bab , peeping into the pot that was over the fire .
`` Dear , how savoury it smells !
I 'll wait till you go in with it to your mother ; for I must ask her how she does myself . ''
`` Will you please to sit down then , miss , '' said Simple Susan , with a smile ; for at this instant she forgot the guinea-hen ; `` I have but just put the parsley into the broth ; but it soon will be ready . ''
During this interval Bab employed herself , much to her own satisfaction , in cross-questioning Susan .
She was rather provoked indeed that she could not learn exactly how each of the ladies was dressed , and what there was to be for dinner at the Abbey ; and she was curious beyond measure to find out what Miss Somers meant , by saying that she would call at Mr .
Price 's cottage at six o'clock in the evening .
`` What do you think she could mean ? ''
`` I thought she meant what she said , '' replied Susan , `` that she would come here at six o'clock . ''
`` Ay , that 's as plain as a pike-staff , '' said Barbara ; `` but what else did she mean , think you ?
People , you know , do n't always mean exactly , downright , neither more nor less than what they say . ''
`` Not always , '' said Susan , with an arch smile , which convinced Barbara that she was not quite a simpleton .
`` NOT ALWAYS , '' repeated Barbara colouring , -- '' oh , then I suppose you have some guess at what Miss Somers meant . ''
`` No , '' said Susan , `` I was not thinking about Miss Somers , when I said not always . ''
`` How nice that broth does look , '' resumed Barbara , after a pause .
Susan had now poured the broth into a basin , and as she strewed over it the bright orange marigolds , it looked very tempting .
She tasted it , and added now a little salt , and now a little more , till she thought it was just to her mother 's taste .
`` Oh !
_I_ must taste it , '' said Bab , taking the basin up greedily .
`` Wo n't you take a spoon ? ''
said Susan , trembling at the large mouthfuls which Barbara sucked up with a terrible noise .
`` Take a spoonful , indeed ! ''
exclaimed Barbara , setting down the basin in high anger .
`` The next time I taste your broth you shall affront me , if you dare !
The next time I set my foot in this house , you shall be as saucy to me as you please . ''
And she flounced out of the house , repeating '' TAKE A SPOON , PIG , was what you meant to say . ''
Susan stood in amazement at the beginning of this speech ; but the concluding words explained to her the mystery .
Some years before this time , when Susan was a very little girl , and could scarcely speak plain , as she was eating a basin of bread and milk for her supper at the cottage door , a great pig came up , and put his nose into the basin .
Susan was willing that the pig should have some share of the bread and milk ; but as she ate with a spoon and he with his large mouth , she presently discovered that he was likely to have more than his share ; and in a simple tone of expostulation she said to him , `` Take a POON , pig .
`` * The saying become proverbial in the village .
Susan 's little companions repeated it , and applied it upon many occasions , whenever anyone claimed more than his share of anything good .
Barbara , who was then not Miss Barbara , but plain Bab , and who had played with all the poor children in the neighbourhood , was often reproved in her unjust methods of division by Susan 's proverb .
Susan , as she grew up , forgot the childish saying ; but the remembrance of it rankled in Barbara 's mind , and it was to this that she suspected Susan had alluded , when she recommended a spoon to her , whilst she was swallowing the basin of broth .
* This is a true anecdote .
`` La , miss , '' said Barbara 's maid , when she found her mistress in a passion upon her return from Susan 's , `` I only wondered you did her the honour to set your foot within her doors .
What need have you to trouble her for news about the Abbey folks , when your own papa has been there all the morning , and is just come in , and can tell you everything ? ''
Barbara did not know that her father meant to go to the Abbey that morning , for Attorney Case was mysterious even to his own family about his morning rides .
He never chose to be asked where he was going , or where he had been ; and this made his servants more than commonly inquisitive to trace him .
Barbara , against whose apparent childishness and real cunning he was not sufficiently on his guard , had often the art of drawing him into conversation about his visits .
She ran into her father 's parlour ; but she knew , the moment she saw his face , that it was no time to ask questions ; his pen was across his mouth , and his brown wig pushed oblique upon his contracted forehead .
The wig was always pushed crooked whenever he was in a brown or rather , a black study .
Barbara , who did not , like Susan , bear with her father 's testy humour from affection and gentleness of disposition , but who always humoured him from artifice , tried all her skill to fathom his thoughts , and when she found that it would not do , she went to tell her maid so , and to complain that her father was so cross there was no bearing him .
It is true that Attorney Case was not in the happiest mood possible ; for he was by no means satisfied with his morning 's work at the Abbey .
Sir Arthur Somers , the NEW MAN , did not suit him , and he began to be rather apprehensive that he should not suit Sir Arthur .
He had sound reasons for his doubts .
Sir Arthur Somers was an excellent lawyer , and a perfectly honest man .
This seemed to our attorney a contradiction in terms ; in the course of his practice the case had not occurred ; and he had no precedents ready to direct his proceedings .
Sir Arthur was also a man of wit and eloquence , yet of plain dealing and humanity .
The attorney could not persuade himself to believe that his benevolence was anything but enlightened cunning , and his plain dealing he one minute dreaded as the masterpiece of art , and the next despised as the characteristic of folly .
In short , he had not yet decided whether he was an honest man or a knave .
He had settled accounts with him for his late agency , and had talked about sundry matters of business .
He constantly perceived , however , that he could not impose upon Sir Arthur ; but the idea that he could know all the mazes of the law , and yet prefer the straight road , was incomprehensible .
Mr .
Case , having paid Sir Arthur some compliments on his great legal abilities , and his high reputation at the bar , he coolly replied , `` I have left the bar . ''
The attorney looked in unfeigned astonishment , that a man who was actually making 3 , OOO pounds per annum at the bar should leave it .
`` I am come , '' said Sir Arthur , `` to enjoy that kind of domestic life in the country which I prefer to all others , and amongst people whose happiness I hope to increase . ''
At this speech the attorney changed his ground , flattering himself that he should find his man averse to business , and ignorant of country affairs .
He talked of the value of land , and of new leases .
Sir Arthur wished to enlarge his domain , and to make a ride round it .
A map of it was lying upon the table , and Farmer Price 's garden came exactly across the new road for the ride .
Sir Arthur looked disappointed ; and the keen attorney seized the moment to inform him that '' Price 's whole land was at his disposal . ''
`` At my disposal !
how so ? ''
cried Sir Arthur , eagerly ; `` it will not be out of lease , I believe , these ten years .
I 'll look into the rent roll again ; perhaps I am mistaken . ''
`` You are mistaken , my good sir , and you are not mistaken , '' said Mr .
Case , with a shrewd smile .
`` In one sense , the land will not be out of lease these ten years , and in another it is out of lease at this present time .
To come to the point at once , the lease is , ab origine , null and void .
I have detected a capital flaw in the body of it .
I pledge my credit upon it , sir , it ca n't stand a single term in law or equity . ''
The attorney observed , that at these words Sir Arthur 's eye was fixed with a look of earnest attention .
`` Now I have him , '' said the cunning tempter to himself .
`` Neither in law nor equity , '' repeated Sir Arthur , with apparent incredulity .
`` Are you sure of that , Mr .
Case ? ''
`` Sure !
As I told you before , sir , I 'd pledge my whole credit upon the thing -- I 'd stake my existence . ''
`` THAT 'S SOMETHING , '' said Sir Arthur , as if he was pondering upon the matter .
The attorney went on with all the eagerness of a keen man , who sees a chance at one stroke of winning a rich friend , and of ruining a poor enemy .
He explained , with legal volubility and technical amplification , the nature of the mistake in Mr .
Price 's lease .
`` It was , sir , '' said he , '' a lease for the life of Peter Price , Susanna his wife , and to the survivor or survivors of them , or for the full time and term of twenty years , to be computed from the first day of May then next ensuing .
Now , sir , this , you see , is a lease in reversion , which the late Sir Benjamin Somers had not , by his settlement , a right to make .
This is a curious mistake , you see , Sir Arthur ; and in filling up those printed leases there 's always a good chance of some flaw .
I find it perpetually ; but I never found a better than this in the whole course of my practice . ''
Sir Arthur stood in silence .
`` My dear sir , '' said the attorney , taking him by the button , `` you have no scruple of stirring in this business ? ''
`` A little , '' said Sir Arthur .
`` Why , then , that can be done away in a moment .
Your name shall not appear in it at all .
You have nothing to do but to make over the lease to me .
I make all safe to you with my bond .
Now , being in possession , I come forward in my own proper person .
SHALL I PROCEED ? ''
`` No -- you have said enough , '' replied Sir Arthur .
`` The case , indeed , lies in a nutshell , '' said the attorney , who had by this time worked himself up to such a pitch of professional enthusiasm , that , intent upon his vision of a lawsuit , he totally forgot to observe the impression his words made upon Sir Arthur .
`` There 's only one thing we have forgotten all this time , '' said Sir Arthur .
`` What can that be , sir ? ''
`` That we shall ruin this poor man . ''
Case was thunderstruck at these words , or rather , by the look which accompanied them .
He recollected that he had laid himself open before he was sure of Sir Arthur 's REAL character .
He softened , and said he should have had certainly more CONSIDERATION in the case of any but a litigious , pig-headed fellow , as he knew Price to be .
`` If he be litigious , '' said Sir Arthur , `` I shall certainly be glad to get him fairly out of the parish as soon as possible .
When you go home , you will be so good , sir , as to send me his lease , that I may satisfy myself before we stir in this business . ''
The attorney , brightening up , prepared to take leave ; but he could not persuade himself to take his departure without making one push at Sir Arthur about the agency .
`` I will not trouble you , Sir Arthur , with this lease of Price 's , '' said Case ; `` I 'll leave it with your agent .
Whom shall I apply to ? ''
`` TO MYSELF , sir , if you please , '' replied Sir Arthur .
The courtiers of Louis the Fourteenth could not have looked more astounded than our attorney , when they received from their monarch a similar answer .
It was this unexpected reply of Sir Arthur 's which had deranged the temper of Mr .
Case , and caused his wig to stand so crooked upon his forehead , and which had rendered him impenetrably silent to his inquisitive daughter Barbara .
After having walked up and down his room , conversing with himself , for some time , the attorney concluded that the agency must be given to somebody when Sir Arthur should have to attend his duty in Parliament ; that the agency , even for the winter season , was not a thing to be neglected ; and that , if he managed well , he might yet secure it for himself .
He had often found that small timely presents worked wonderfully upon his own mind , and he judged of others by himself .
The tenants had been in the reluctant but constant practice of making him continual petty offerings ; and he resolved to try the same course with Sir Arthur , whose resolution to be his own agent , he thought , argued a close , saving , avaricious disposition .
He had heard the housekeeper at the Abbey inquiring , as he passed through the servants , whether there was any lamb to be gotten ?
She said that Sir Arthur was remarkably fond of lamb , and that she wished she could get a quarter for him .
Immediately he sallied into his kitchen , as soon as the idea struck him , and asked a shepherd , who was waiting there , whether he knew of a nice fat lamb to be had anywhere in the neighbourhood .
`` I know of one , '' cried Barbara .
`` Susan Price has a pet lamb that 's as fat as fat could be . ''
The attorney easily caught at these words , and speedily devised a scheme for obtaining Susan 's lamb for nothing .
It would be something strange if an attorney of his talents and standing was not an over-match for Simple Susan .
He prowled forth in search of his prey .
He found Susan packing up her father 's little wardrobe ; and when she looked up as she knelt , he saw that she had been in tears .
`` How is your mother to-day , Susan ? ''
inquired the attorney .
`` Worse , sir .
My father goes to-morrow . ''
`` That 's a pity . ''
`` It ca n't be helped , '' said Susan , with a sigh .
`` It ca n't be helped -- how do you know that ? ''
said Case .
`` Sir , DEAR sir ! ''
cried she , looking up at him , and a sudden ray of hope beamed in her ingenuous countenance .
`` And if YOU could help it , Susan ? ''
said he .
Susan clasped her hands in silence , more expressive than words .
`` You CAN help it , Susan . ''
She started up in an ecstasy .
`` What would you give now to have your father at home for a whole week longer ? ''
`` Anything ! -- but I have nothing . ''
`` Yes , but you have , a lamb , '' said the hard-hearted attorney .
`` My poor little lamb ! ''
said Susan ; `` but what can that do ? ''
`` What good can any lamb do ?
Is not lamb good to eat ?
Why do you look so pale , girl ?
Are not sheep killed every day , and do n't you eat mutton ?
Is your lamb better than anybody else 's , think you ? ''
`` I do n't know , '' said Susan , `` but I love it better . ''
`` More fool you , '' said he .
`` It feeds out of hand , it follows me about ; I have always taken care of it ; my mother gave it to me . ''
`` Well , say no more about it , then , '' he cynically observed ; `` if you love your lamb better than both your father and your mother , keep it , and good morning to you . ''
`` Stay , oh stay ! ''
cried Susan , catching the skirt of his coat with an eager , trembling hand ; -- '' a whole week , did you say ?
My mother may get better in that time .
No , I do not love my lamb half so well . ''
The struggle of her mind ceased , and with a placid countenance and calm voice , `` take the lamb , '' said she .
`` Where is it ? ''
said the attorney .
`` Grazing in the meadow , by the river side . ''
`` It must be brought up before night-fall for the butcher , remember . ''
`` I shall not forget it , '' said Susan , steadily .
As soon , however , as her persecutor turned his back and quitted the house , Susan sat down , and hid her face in her hands .
She was soon aroused by the sound of her mother 's feeble voice , who was calling Susan from the inner room where she lay .
Susan went in ; but did not undraw the curtain as she stood beside the bed .
`` Are you there , love ?
Undraw the curtain , that I may see you , and tell me ; -- I thought I heard some strange voice just now talking to my child .
Something 's amiss , Susan , '' said her mother , raising herself as well as she was able in the bed , to examine her daughter 's countenance .
`` Would you think it amiss , then , my dear mother , '' said Susan , stooping to kiss her -- '' would you think it amiss , if my father was to stay with us a week longer ? ''
`` Susan !
you do n't say so ? ''
`` He is , indeed , a whole week ; -- but how burning hot your hand is still . ''
`` Are you sure he will stay ? ''
inquired her mother .
`` How do you know ?
Who told you so ?
Tell me all quick . ''
`` Attorney Case told me so ; he can get him a week 's longer leave of absence , and he has promised he will . ''
`` God bless him for it , for ever and ever ! ''
said the poor woman , joining her hands .
`` May the blessing of heaven be with him ! ''
Susan closed the curtains , and was silent .
She COULD NOT SAY AMEN .
She was called out of the room at this moment , for a messenger was come from the Abbey for the bread-bills .
It was she who always made out the bills , for though she had not a great number of lessons from the writing-master , she had taken so much pains to learn that she could write a very neat , legible hand , and she found this very useful .
She was not , to be sure , particularly inclined to draw out a long bill at this instant , but business must be done .
She set to work , ruled her lines for the pounds , shillings and pence , made out the bill for the Abbey , and despatched the impatient messenger .
She then resolved to make out all the bills for the neighbours , who had many of them taken a few loaves and rolls of her baking .
`` I had better get all my business finished , '' said she to herself , `` before I go down to the meadow to take leave of my poor lamb . ''
This was sooner said than done , for she found that she had a great number of bills to write , and the slate on which she had entered the account was not immediately to be found ; and when it was found the figures were almost rubbed out .
Barbara had sat down upon it .
Susan pored over the number of loaves , and the names of the persons who took them ; and she wrote and cast up sums , and corrected and re-corrected them , till her head grew quite puzzled .
The table was covered with little square bits of paper , on which she had been writing bills over and over again , when her father came in with a bill in his hand .
`` How 's this , Susan ? ''
said he .
`` How can ye be so careless , child ?
What is your head running upon ?
Here , look at the bill you were sending up to the Abbey ?
I met the messenger , and luckily asked to see how much it was .
Look at it . ''
Susan looked and blushed ; it was written , `` Sir Arthur Somers , to John Price , debtor , six dozen LAMBS , so much . ''
She altered it , and returned it to her father ; but he had taken up some of the papers which lay upon the table .
`` What are all these , child ? ''
`` Some of them are wrong , and I 've written them out again , '' said Susan .
`` Some of them !
All of them , I think , seem to be wrong , if I can read , '' said her father , rather angrily , and he pointed out to her sundry strange mistakes .
Her head , indeed , had been running upon her poor lamb .
She corrected all the mistakes with so much patience , and bore to be blamed with so much good humour , that her father at last said , that it was impossible ever to scold Susan , without being in the wrong at the last .
As soon as all was set right , Price took the bills , and said he would go round to the neighbours , and collect the money himself ; for that he should be very proud to have it to say to them , that it was all earned by his own little daughter .
Susan resolved to keep the pleasure of telling him of his week 's reprieve till he should come home to sup , as he had promised to do , in her mother 's room .
She was not sorry to hear him sigh as he passed the knapsack , which she had been packing up for his journey .
`` How delighted he will be when he hears the good news ! ''
said she , to herself ; `` but I know he will be a little sorry too for my poor lamb . ''
As Susan had now settled all her business , she thought she could have time to go down to the meadow by the river side to see her favourite ; but just as she had tied on her straw hat the village clock struck four , and this was the hour at which she always went to fetch her little brothers home from a dame-school near the village .
She knew that they would be disappointed , if she was later than usual , and she did not like to keep them waiting , because they were very patient , good boys ; so she put off the visit to her lamb , and went immediately for her brothers .
CHAPTER II .
Ev'n in the spring and playtime of the year , That calls th ' unwonted villager abroad , With all her little ones , a sportive train , To gather king-cups in the yellow mead , And prink their heads with daisies .
Cowper .
The dame-school , which was about a mile from the hamlet , was not a showy edifice ; but it was reverenced as much by the young race of village scholars as if it had been the most stately mansion in the land ; it was a low roofed , long , thatched tenement , sheltered by a few reverend oaks , under which many generations of hopeful children had gambolled in their turn .
The close shaven green , which sloped down from the hatch-door of the schoolroom , was paled round with a rude paling , which , though decayed in some parts by time , was not in any place broken by violence .
The place bespoke order and peace .
The dame who governed was well obeyed , because she was just and well beloved , and because she was ever glad to give well earned praise and pleasure to her little subjects .
Susan had once been under her gentle dominion , and had been deservedly her favourite scholar .
The dame often cited her as the best example to the succeeding tribe of emulous youngsters .
She had scarcely opened the wicket which separated the green before the schoolroom door from the lane , when she heard the merry voices of the children , and saw the little troup issuing from the hatchway , and spreading over the green .
`` Oh , there 's Susan ! ''
cried her two little brothers , running , leaping , and bounding up to her ; and many of the other rosy girls and boys crowded round her , to talk of their plays ; for Susan was easily interested in all that made others happy ; but she could not make them comprehend , that , if they all spoke at once it was not possible that she could hear what was said .
The voices were still raised one above another , all eager to establish some important observation about ninepins , or marbles , or tops , or bows and arrows , when suddenly music was heard and the crowd was silenced .
The music seemed to be near the spot where the children were standing , and they looked round to see whence it could come .
Susan pointed to the great oak-tree , and they beheld , seated under its shade , an old man playing upon his harp .
The children all approached -- at first timidly , for the sounds were solemn ; but as the harper heard their little footsteps coming towards him , he changed his hand and played one of his most lively tunes .
The circle closed , and pressed nearer and nearer to him ; some who were in the foremost row whispered to each other , `` He is blind ! ''
`` What a pity ! ''
and `` He looks very poor , -- what a ragged coat he wears ! ''
said others .
`` He must be very old , for all his hair is white ; and he must have travelled a great way , for his shoes are quite worn out , '' observed another .
All these remarks were made whilst he was tuning his harp , for when he once more began to play , not a word was uttered .
He seemed pleased by their simple exclamations of wonder and delight , and , eager to amuse his young audience , he played now a gay and now a pathetic air , to suit their several humours .
Susan 's voice , which was soft and sweet , expressive of gentleness and good nature , caught his ear the moment she spoke .
He turned his face eagerly to the place where she stood ; and it was observed , that whenever she said that she liked any tune particularly he played it over again .
`` I am blind , '' said the old man , `` and can not see your faces ; but I know you all asunder by your voices , and I can guess pretty well at all your humours and characters by your voices . ''
`` Can you so , indeed ? ''
cried Susan 's little brother William , who had stationed himself between the old man 's knees .
`` Then you heard MY sister Susan speak just now .
Can you tell us what sort of person she is ? ''
`` That I can , I think , without being a conjurer , '' said the old man , lifting the boy up on his knee ; `` YOUR sister Susan is good-natured . ''
The boy clapped his hands .
`` And good-tempered . ''
`` RIGHT , '' said little William , with a louder clap of applause .
`` And very fond of the little boy who sits upon my knee . ''
`` O right !
right !
quite right ! ''
exclaimed the child , and `` quite right '' echoed on all sides .
`` But how came you to know so much , when you are blind ? ''
said William , examining the old man attentively .
`` Hush , '' said John , who was a year older than his brother , and very sage , '' you should not put him in mind of his being blind . ''
`` Though I am blind , '' said the harper , `` I can hear , you know , and I heard from your sister herself all that I told you of her , that she was good- tempered and good-natured and fond of you . ''
`` Oh , that 's wrong -- you did not hear all that from herself , I 'm sure , '' said John , `` for nobody ever hears her praising herself . ''
`` Did not I hear her tell you , '' said the harper , `` when you first came round me , that she was in a great hurry to go home , but that she would stay a little while , since you wished it so much ?
Was not that good- natured ?
And when you said you did not like the tune she liked best , she was not angry with you , but said , 'Then play William 's first , if you please , ' -- was not that good-tempered ? ''
`` Oh , '' interrupted William , `` it 's all true ; but how did you find out that she was fond of me ? ''
`` That is such a difficult question , '' said the harper , `` that I must take time to consider . ''
The harper tuned his instrument , as he pondered , or seemed to ponder : and at this instant , two boys who had been searching for birds ' nests in the hedges , and who had heard the sound of the harp , came blustering up , and pushing their way through the circle , one of them exclaimed , `` What 's going on here ?
Who are you , my old fellow ?
A blind harper !
Well , play us a tune , if you can play ever a good one -- play me -- let 's see , what shall he play , Bob ? ''
added he turning to his companion .
`` Bumper Squire Jones . ''
The old man , though he did not seem quite pleased with the peremptory manner of the request , played , as he was desired , `` Bumper Squire Jones '' ; and several other tunes were afterwards bespoke by the same rough and tyrannical voice .
The little children shrunk back in timid silence , and eyed the brutal boy with dislike .
This boy was the son of Attorney Case ; and as his father had neglected to correct his temper when he was a child , as he grew up it became insufferable .
All who were younger and weaker than himself , dreaded his approach , and detested him as a tyrant .
When the old harper was so tired that he could play no more , a lad , who usually carried his harp for him , and who was within call , came up , and held his master 's hat to the company , saying , `` Will you be pleased to remember us ? ''
The children readily produced their halfpence , and thought their wealth well bestowed upon this poor , good-natured man , who had taken so much pains to entertain them , better even than upon the gingerbread woman , whose stall they loved to frequent .
The hat was held some time to the attorney 's son before he chose to see it .
At last he put his hand surlily into his waistcoat pocket and pulled out a shilling .
There were sixpennyworth of halfpence in the hat .
`` I 'll take these halfpence , '' said he , `` and here 's a shilling for you . ''
`` God bless you , sir , '' said the lad ; but as he took the shilling which the young gentleman had slily put INTO THE BLIND MAN 'S HAND , he saw that it was not worth one farthing .
`` I am afraid it is not good , sir , '' said the lad , whose business it was to examine the money for his master .
`` I am afraid , then , you 'll get no other , '' said young Case , with an insulting laugh .
`` It never will do , sir , '' persisted the lad ; `` look at it yourself ; the edges are all yellow !
you can see the copper through it quite plain .
Sir , nobody will take it from us . ''
`` That 's your affair , '' said the brutal boy , pushing away his hand .
`` You may pass it , you know , as well as I do , if you look sharp .
You have taken it from me , and I sha n't take it back again , I promise you . ''
A whisper of `` that 's very unjust , '' was heard .
The little assembly , though under evident constraint , could no longer suppress their indignation .
`` Who says it 's unjust ? ''
cried the tyrant , sternly , looking down upon his judges .
Susan 's little brothers had held her gown fast , to prevent her from moving at the beginning of this contest , and she was now so much interested to see the end of it , that she stood still , without making any resistance .
`` Is anyone here amongst yourselves a judge of silver ? ''
said the old man .
`` Yes , here 's the butcher 's boy , '' said the attorney 's son ; `` show it to him . ''
He was a sickly-looking boy , and of a remarkably peaceful disposition .
Young Case fancied that he would be afraid to give judgment against him .
However , after some moments ' hesitation , and after turning the shilling round several times , he pronounced , `` that , as far as his judgment went , but he did not pretend to be a downright CERTAIN SURE of it , the shilling was not over and above good . ''
Then to Susan , to screen himself from manifest danger , for the attorney 's son looked upon him with a vengeful mien , `` But here 's Susan here , who understands silver a great deal better than I do ; she takes a power of it for bread , you know . ''
`` I 'll leave it to her , '' said the old harper ; `` if she says the shilling is good , keep it , Jack . ''
The shilling was handed to Susan , who , though she had with becoming modesty forborne all interference , did not hesitate , when she was called upon , to speak the truth : `` I think that this shilling is a bad one , '' said she ; and the gentle but firm tone in which she pronounced the words , for a moment awed and silenced the angry and brutal boy .
`` There 's another , then , '' cried he ; `` I have sixpences and shillings too in plenty , thank my stars . ''
Susan now walked away with her two little brothers , and all the other children separated to go to their several homes .
The old harper called to Susan , and begged , that , if she was going towards the village , she would be so kind as to show him the way .
His lad took up his harp , and little William took the old man by the hand .
`` I 'll lead him , I can lead him , '' said he ; and John ran on before them , to gather king-cups in the meadow .
There was a small rivulet , which they had to cross , and as a plank which served for a bridge over it was rather narrow , Susan was afraid to trust the old blind man to his little conductor ; she therefore went on the tottering plank first herself , and then led the old harper carefully over .
They were now come to a gate , which opened upon the high road to the village .
`` There is the high road straight before you , '' said Susan to the lad , who was carrying his master 's harp ; `` you ca n't miss it .
Now I must bid you a good evening ; for I 'm in a great hurry to get home , and must go the short way across the fields here , which would not be so pleasant for you , because of the stiles .
Good-bye . ''
The old harper thanked her , and went along the high road , whilst she and her brothers tripped on as fast as they could by the short way across the fields .
`` Miss Somers , I am afraid , will be waiting for us , '' said Susan .
`` You know she said she would call at six ; and by the length of our shadows I'm sure it is late . ''
When they came to their own cottage-door , they heard many voices , and they saw , when they entered , several ladies standing in the kitchen .
`` Come in , Susan ; we thought you had quite forsaken us , '' said Miss Somers to Susan , who advanced timidly .
`` I fancy you forgot that we promised to pay you a visit this evening , but you need not blush so much about the matter ; there is no great harm done ; we have only been here about five minutes ; and we have been well employed in admiring your neat garden , and your orderly shelves .
Is it you , Susan , who keeps these things in such nice order ? ''
continued Miss Somers , looking round the kitchen .
Before Susan could reply , little William pushed forward , and answered , '' Yes , ma'am , it is MY sister Susan that keeps everything neat ; and she always comes to school for us , too , which was what caused her to be so late . ''
`` Because as how , '' continued John , `` she was loth to refuse us the hearing a blind man play on the harp .
It was we kept her , and we hopes , ma'am , as you ARE -- as you SEEM so good , you wo n't take it amiss . ''
Miss Somers and her sister smiled at the affectionate simplicity with which Susan 's little brothers undertook her defence , and they were , from this slight circumstance , disposed to think yet more favourably of a family which seemed so well united .
They took Susan along with them through the village .
Many neighbours came to their doors , and far from envying , they all secretly wished Susan well as she passed .
`` I fancy we shall find what we want here , '' said Miss Somers , stopping before a shop , where unfolded sheets of pins and glass buttons glistened in the window , and where rolls of many coloured ribbons appeared ranged in tempting order .
She went in , and was rejoiced to see the shelves at the back of the counter well-furnished with glossy tiers of stuffs , and gay , neat printed linens and calicoes .
`` Now , Susan , choose yourself a gown , '' said Miss Somers ; `` you set an example of industry and good conduct , of which we wish to take public notice , for the benefit of others . ''
The shopkeeper , who was father to Susan 's friend Rose , looked much satisfied by this speech , and as if a compliment had been paid to himself , bowed low to Miss Somers , and then with alertness , which a London linen-draper might have admired , produced piece after piece of his best goods to his young customer -- unrolled , unfolded , held the bright stuffs and calendered calicoes in various lights .
Now stretched his arm to the highest shelves , and brought down in a trice what seemed to be beyond the reach of any but a giant 's arm ; now dived into some hidden recess beneath the counter , and brought to light fresh beauties and fresh temptations .
Susan looked on with more indifference than most of the spectators .
She was thinking much of her lamb , and more of her father .
Miss Somers had put a bright guinea into her hand , and had bid her pay for her own gown ; but Susan , as she looked at the guinea , thought it was a great deal of money to lay out upon herself , and she wished , but did know like to ask , that she might keep it for a better purpose .
Some people are wholly inattentive to the lesser feelings , and incapable of reading the countenances of those on whom they bestow their bounty .
Miss Somers and her sister were not of this roughly charitable class .
`` She does not like any of these things , '' whispered Miss Somers to her sister .
Her sister observed , that Susan looked as if her thoughts were far distant from gowns .
`` If you do n't fancy any of these , '' said the civil shopkeeper to Susan , '' we shall have a new assortment of calicoes for the spring season , soon from town . ''
`` Oh , '' interrupted Susan , with a smile and a blush ; `` these are all pretty , and too good for me , but -- '' '' BUT what , Susan ? ''
said Miss Somers .
`` Tell us what is passing in your little mind . ''
Susan hesitated .
`` Well then , we will not press you , you are scarcely acquainted with us yet ; when you are , you will not be afraid , I hope , to speak your mind .
Put this shining yellow counter , '' continued she , pointing to the guinea , `` in your pocket , and make what use of it you please .
From what we know , and from what we have heard of you , we are persuaded that you will make a good use of it . ''
`` I think , madam , '' said the master of the shop , with a shrewd , good natured look , `` I could give a pretty good guess myself what will become of that guinea ; but I say nothing . ''
`` No , that is right , '' said Miss Somers ; `` we leave Susan entirely at liberty ; and now we will not detain her any longer .
Good night , Susan , we shall soon come again to your neat cottage . ''
Susan curtsied , with an expressive look of gratitude , and with a modest frankness in her countenance , which seemed to say , `` I would tell you , and welcome , what I want to do with the guinea ; but I am not used to speak before so many people .
When you come to our cottage again you shall know all . ''
When Susan had departed , Miss Somers turned to the obliging shopkeeper , who was folding up all the things he had opened .
`` You have had a great deal of trouble with us , sir , '' said she ; `` and since Susan will not choose a gown for herself , I must . ''
She selected the prettiest ; and whilst the man was rolling it in paper , she asked him several questions about Susan and her family , which he was delighted to answer , because he had now all opportunity of saying as much as he wished in her praise .
`` No later back , ma'am , than last May morning , '' said he , `` as my daughter Rose was telling us , Susan did a turn , in her quiet way , by her mother , that would not displease you if you were to hear it .
She was to have been Queen of the May , which in our little village , amongst the younger tribe , is a thing that is thought of a good deal ; but Susan 's mother was ill , and Susan , after sitting up with her all night , would not leave her in the morning , even when they brought the crown to her .
She put the crown upon my daughter Rose 's head with her own hands ; and , to be sure , Rose loves her as well as if she was her own sister .
But I do n't speak from partiality ; for I am no relation whatever to the Prices -- only a well-wisher , as everyone , I believe , who knows them is .
I 'll send the parcel up to the Abbey , shall I , ma'am ? ''
`` If you please , '' said Miss Somers , `` and , as soon as you receive your new things from town , let us know .
You will , I hope , find us good customers and well-wishers , '' added she , with a smile ; `` for those who wish well to their neighbours surely deserve to have well-wishers themselves . ''
A few words may encourage the benevolent passions , and may dispose people to live in peace and happiness ; a few words may set them at variance , and may lead to misery and lawsuits .
Attorney Case and Miss Somers were both equally convinced of this , and their practice was uniformly consistent with their principles .
But now to return to Susan .
She put the bright guinea carefully into the glove with the twelve shillings , which she had received from her companions on May day .
Besides this treasure , she calculated that the amount of the bills for bread could not be less than eight or nine and thirty shillings ; and as her father was now sure of a week 's reprieve , she had great hopes that , by some means or other , it would be possible to make up the whole sum necessary to pay for a substitute .
`` If that could but be done , '' said she to herself , `` how happy would my mother be .
She would be quite stout again , for she certainly is a great deal better , since I told her that father would stay a week longer .
Ah !
but she would not have blessed Attorney Case , though , if she had known about my poor Daisy . ''
Susan took the path that led to the meadow by the waterside , resolved to go by herself , and take leave of her innocent favourite .
But she did not pass by unperceived .
Her little brothers were watching for her return , and , as soon as they saw her , they ran after her , and overtook her as she reached the meadow .
`` What did that good lady want with you ? ''
cried William ; but , looking up in his sister 's face , he saw tears in her eyes , and he was silent , and walked on quietly .
Susan saw her lamb by the water-side .
`` Who are those two men ? ''
said William .
`` What are they going to do with DAISY ? ''
The two men were Attorney Case and the butcher .
The butcher was feeling whether the lamb was fat .
Susan sat down upon the bank in silent sorrow ; her little brothers ran up to the butcher , and demanded whether he was going to DO ANY HARM to the lamb .
The butcher did not answer , but the attorney replied , `` It is not your sister 's lamb any longer ; it 's mine -- mine to all intents and purposes . ''
`` Yours ! ''
cried the children , with terror ; `` and will you kill it ? ''
`` That 's the butcher 's business . ''
The little boys now burst into piercing lamentations .
They pushed away the butcher 's hand ; they threw their arms round the neck of the lamb ; they kissed its forehead -- it bleated .
`` It will not bleat to-morrow ! ''
said William , and he wept bitterly .
The butcher looked aside , and hastily rubbed his eyes with the corner of his blue apron .
The attorney stood unmoved ; he pulled up the head of the lamb , which had just stooped to crop a mouthful of clover .
`` I have no time to waste , '' said he ; `` butcher , you 'll account with me .
If it 's fat -- the sooner the better .
I 've no more to say . ''
And he walked off , deaf to the prayers of the poor children .
As soon as the attorney was out of sight , Susan rose from the bank where she was seated , came up to her lamb , and stooped to gather some of the fresh dewy trefoil , to let it eat out of her hand for the last time .
Poor Daisy licked her well known hand .
`` Now , let us go , '' said Susan .
`` I 'll wait as long as you please , '' said the butcher .
Susan thanked him , but walked away quickly , without looking again at her lamb .
Her little brothers begged the man to stay a few minutes , for they had gathered a handful of blue speedwell and yellow crowsfoot , and they were decking the poor animal .
As it followed the boys through the village , the children collected as they passed , and the butcher 's own son was amongst the number .
Susan 's steadiness about the bad shilling was full in this boy's memory ; it had saved him a beating .
He went directly to his father to beg the life of Susan 's lamb .
`` I was thinking about it , boy , myself , '' said the butcher ; `` it 's a sin to kill a PET LAMB , I 'm thinking -- any way , it 's what I 'm not used to , and do n't fancy doing , and I 'll go and say as much to Attorney Case ; but he's a hard man ; there 's but one way to deal with him , and that 's the way I must take , though so be I shall be the loser thereby ; but we 'll say nothing to the boys , for fear it might be the thing would not take ; and then it would be worse again to poor Susan , who is a good girl , and always was , as well as she may , being of a good breed , and well reared from the first . ''
`` Come , lads , do n't keep a crowd and a scandal about my door , '' continued he , aloud , to the children ; `` turn the lamb in here , John , in the paddock , for to-night , and go your ways home . ''
The crowd dispersed , but murmured , and the butcher went to the attorney .
`` Seeing that all you want is a good , fat , tender lamb , for a present for Sir Arthur , as you told me , '' said the butcher , `` I could let you have what 's as good or better for your purpose . ''
`` Better -- if it 's better , I 'm ready to hear reason . ''
The butcher had choice , tender lamb , he said , fit to eat the next day ; and as Mr .
Case was impatient to make his offering to Sir Arthur , he accepted the butcher 's proposal , though with such seeming reluctance , that he actually squeezed out of him , before he would complete the bargain , a bribe of a fine sweetbread .
In the meantime Susan 's brothers ran home to tell her that her lamb was put into the paddock for the night ; this was all they knew , and even this was some comfort to her .
Rose , her good friend , was with her , and she had before her the pleasure of telling her father of his week 's reprieve .
Her mother was better , and even said she was determined to sit up to supper in her wicker armchair .
Susan was getting this ready for supper , when little William , who was standing at the house door , watching in the dusk for his father 's return , suddenly exclaimed , `` Susan !
if here is not our old man ! ''
`` Yes , '' said the old harper , `` I have found my way to you .
The neighbours were kind enough to show me whereabouts you lived ; for , though I didn't know your name , they guessed who I meant by what I said of you all . ''
Susan came to the door , and the old man was delighted to hear her speak again .
`` If it would not be too bold , '' said he , `` I 'm a stranger in this part of the country , and come from afar off .
My boy has got a bed for himself here in the village ; but I have no place .
Could you be so charitable as to give an old blind man a night 's lodging ? ''
Susan said she would step in and ask her mother ; and she soon returned with an answer , that he was heartily welcome , if he could sleep upon the children 's bed , which was but small .
The old man thankfully entered the hospitable cottage .
He struck his head against the low roof , as he stepped over the doorsill .
`` Many roofs that are twice as high are not half so good , '' said he .
Of this he had just had experience at the house of the Attorney Case , while he had asked , but had been roughly refused all assistance by Miss Barbara , who was , according to her usual custom , standing staring at the hall door .
The old man 's harp was set down in Farmer Price 's kitchen , and he promised to play a tune for the boys before they went to bed ; their mother giving them leave to sit up to supper with their father .
He came home with a sorrowful countenance ; but how soon did it brighten , when Susan , with a smile , said to him , `` Father , we 've good news for you !
good news for us all ! -- You have a whole week longer to stay with us ; and perhaps , '' continued she , putting her little purse into his hands , -- '' perhaps with what 's here , and the bread bills , and what may somehow be got together before a week 's at an end , we may make up the nine guineas for the substitute , as they call him .
Who knows , dearest mother , but we may keep him with us for ever ! ''
As she spoke , she threw her arms round her father , who pressed her to his bosom without speaking , for his heart was full .
He was some little time before he could perfectly believe that what he heard was true ; but the revived smiles of his wife , the noisy joy of his little boys , and the satisfaction that shone in Susan's countenance , convinced him that he was not in a dream .
As they sat down to supper , the old harper was made welcome to his share of the cheerful though frugal meal .
Susan 's father , as soon as supper was finished , even before he would let the harper play a tune for his boys , opened the little purse , which Susan had given him .
He was surprised at the sight of the twelve shillings , and still more , when he came to the bottom of the purse , to see the bright golden guinea .
`` How did you come by all this money , Susan ? ''
said he .
`` Honestly and handsomely , that I 'm sure of beforehand , '' said her proud mother ; `` but how I ca n't make out , except by the baking .
Hey , Susan is this your first baking ? ''
`` Oh , no , no , '' said her father , `` I have her first baking snug here , besides , in my pocket .
I kept it for a surprise , to do your mother's heart good , Susan .
Here 's twenty-nine shillings , and the Abbey bill , which is not paid yet , comes to ten more .
What think you of this , wife ?
Have we not a right to be proud of our Susan ?
Why , '' continued he , turning to the harper , `` I ask your pardon for speaking out so free before strangers in praise of my own , which I know is not mannerly ; but the truth is the fittest thing to be spoken , as I think , at all times ; therefore , here 's your good health , Susan ; why , by-and-by she 'll be worth her weight in gold -- in silver at least .
But tell us , child , how came you by all this riches ?
and how comes it that I do n't go to-morrow ?
All this happy news makes me so gay in myself , I 'm afraid I shall hardly understand it rightly .
But speak on , child -- first bringing us a bottle of the good mead you made last year from your own honey . ''
Susan did not much like to tell the history of her guinea-hen -- of the gown and of her poor lamb .
Part of this would seem as if she was vaunting of her own generosity , and part of it she did not like to recollect .
But her mother pressed to know the whole , and she related it as simply as she could .
When she came to the story of her lamb , her voice faltered , and everybody present was touched .
The old harper sighed once , and cleared his throat several times .
He then asked for his harp , and , after tuning it for a considerable time , he recollected -- for he had often fits of absence -- that he sent for it to play the tune he had promised to the boys .
This harper came from a great distance , from the mountains of Wales , to contend with several other competitors for a prize , which had been advertised by a musical society about a year before this time .
There was to be a splendid ball given upon the occasion at Shrewsbury , which was about five miles from our village .
The prize was ten guineas for the best performer on the harp , and the prize was now to be decided in a few days .
All this intelligence Barbara had long since gained from her maid , who often paid visits to the town of Shrewsbury , and she had long had her imagination inflamed with the idea of this splendid music-meeting and ball .
Often had she sighed to be there , and often had she revolved in her mind schemes for introducing herself to some GENTEEL neighbours , who might take her to the ball IN THEIR CARRIAGE .
How rejoiced , how triumphant was she , when this very evening , just about the time when the butcher was bargaining with her father about Susan 's lamb , a servant from the Abbey rapped at the door , and left a card for Mr .
and Miss Barbara Case .
`` There , '' cried Bab , `` _I_ and PAPA are to dine and drink tea at The Abbey tomorrow .
Who knows ?
I daresay , when they see that I 'm not a vulgar person , and all that ; and if I go cunningly to work with Miss Somers , as I shall , to be sure , I daresay , she 'll take me to the ball with her . ''
`` To be sure , '' said the maid ; `` it 's the least one may expect from a lady who DEMEANS herself to visit Susan Price , and goes about a-shopping for her .
The least she can do for you is to take you in her carriage , WHICH costs nothing , but is just a common civility , to a ball . ''
`` Then pray , Betty , '' continued Miss Barbara , `` do n't forget to-morrow , the first thing you do , to send off to Shrewsbury for my new bonnet .
I must have it to DINE IN , at the Abbey , or the ladies will think nothing of me ; and Betty , remember the mantua-maker too .
I must see and coax papa to buy me a new gown against the ball .
I can see , you know , something of the fashions to-morrow at the Abbey .
I shall LOOK THE LADIES WELL OVER , I promise you .
And , Betty , I have thought of the most charming present for Miss Somers , as papa says it 's good never to go empty-handed to a great house , I 'll make Miss Somers , who is fond , as her maid told you , of such things -- I 'll make Miss Somers a present of that guinea-hen of Susan 's ; it 's of no use to me , so do you carry it up early in the morning to the Abbey , with my compliments .
That 's the thing . ''
In full confidence that her present and her bonnet would operate effectually in her favour , Miss Barbara paid her first visit at the Abbey .
She expected to see wonders .
She was dressed in all the finery which she had heard from her maid , who had heard from the 'prentice of a Shrewsbury milliner , was THE THING in London ; and she was much surprised and disappointed , when she was shown into the room where the Miss Somerses and the ladies of the Abbey were sitting , to see that they did not , in any one part of their dress , agree with the picture her imagination had formed of fashionable ladies .
She was embarrassed when she saw books and work and drawings upon the table , and she began to think that some affront was meant to her , because the COMPANY did not sit with their hands before them .
When Miss Somers endeavoured to find out conversation that would interest her , and spoke of walks and flowers and gardening , of which she was herself fond , Miss Barbara still thought herself undervalued , and soon contrived to expose her ignorance most completely , by talking of things which she did not understand .
Those who never attempt to appear what they are not -- those who do not in their manners pretend to anything unsuited to their habits and situation in life , never are in danger of being laughed at by sensible , well bred people of any rank ; but affectation is the constant and just object of ridicule .
Miss Barbara Case , with her mistaken airs of gentility , aiming to be thought a woman , and a fine lady , whilst she was , in reality , a child and a vulgar attorney 's daughter , rendered herself so thoroughly ridiculous , that the good natured , yet discerning spectators were painfully divided between their sense of comic absurdity and a feeling of shame for one who could feel nothing for herself .
One by one the ladies dropped off .
Miss Somers went out of the room for a few minutes to alter her dress , as it was the custom of the family , before dinner .
She left a portfolio of pretty drawings and good prints , for Miss Barbara 's amusement ; but Miss Barbara 's thoughts were so intent upon the harpers ' ball , that she could not be entertained with such TRIFLES .
How unhappy are those who spend their time in expectation !
They can never enjoy the present moment .
Whilst Barbara was contriving means of interesting Miss Somers in her favour , she recollected , with surprise , that not one word had yet been said of her present of the guinea-hen .
Mrs .
Betty , in the hurry of her dressing her young lady in the morning , had forgotten it ; but it came just whilst Miss Somers was dressing ; and the housekeeper came into her mistress ' room to announce its arrival .
`` Ma'am , '' said she , `` here 's a beautiful guinea-hen just come , with Miss Barbara Case 's compliments to you . ''
Miss Somers knew , by the tone which the housekeeper delivered this message , that there was something in the business which did not perfectly please her .
She made no answer , in expectation that the housekeeper , who was a woman of a very open temper , would explain her cause of dissatisfaction .
In this she was not mistaken .
The housekeeper came close up to the dressing table , and continued , `` I never like to speak till I 'm sure , ma'am , and I 'm not quite sure , to say certain , in this case , ma'am , but still I think it right to tell you , which ca n't wrong anybody , what came across my mind about this same guinea-hen , ma'am ; and you can inquire into it , and do as you please afterwards , ma'am .
Some time ago we had fine guinea-fowls of our own , and I made bold , not thinking , to be sure , that all our own would die away from us , as they have done , to give a fine couple last Christmas to Susan Price , and very fond and pleased she was at the time , and I 'm sure would never have parted with the hen with her good-will ; but if my eyes do n't strangely mistake , this hen , that comes from Miss Barbara , is the selfsame identical guinea-hen that I gave to Susan .
And how Miss Bab came by it is the thing that puzzles me .
If my boy Philip was at home , maybe , as he 's often at Mrs .
Price 's ( which I do n't disapprove ) , he might know the history of the guinea-hen .
I expect him home this night , and if you have no objection , I will sift the affair . ''
`` The shortest way , I think , '' said Henrietta , `` would be to ask Miss Case herself about it , which I will do this evening . ''
`` If you please , ma'am , '' said the housekeeper , coldly ; for she knew that Miss Barbara was not famous in the village for speaking truth .
Dinner was now served .
Attorney Case expected to smell mint sauce , and , as the covers were taken from off the dishes , looked around for lamb ; but no lamb appeared .
He had a dexterous knack of twisting the conversation to his point .
Sir Arthur was speaking , when they sat down to dinner , of a new carving knife , which he lately had had made for his sister .
The attorney immediately went from carving-knives to poultry ; thence to butcher 's meat .
Some joints , he observed , were much more difficult to carve than others .
He never saw a man carve better than the gentleman opposite him , who was the curate of the parish .
`` But , sir , '' said the vulgar attorney , `` I must make bold to differ with you in one point , and I 'll appeal to Sir Arthur .
Sir Arthur , pray may I ask , when you carve a forequarter of lamb , do you , when you raise the shoulder , throw in salt , or not ? ''
This well prepared question was not lost upon Sir Arthur .
The attorney was thanked for his intended present ; but mortified and surprised to hear Sir Arthur say that it was a constant rule of his never to accept of any presents from his neighbours .
`` If we were to accept a lamb from a rich neighbour on my estate , '' said he , `` I am afraid we should mortify many of our poor tenants , who can have little to offer , though , perhaps , they may bear us thorough good-will notwithstanding . ''
After the ladies left the dining-room , as they were walking up and down the large hall , Miss Barbara had a fair opportunity of imitating her keen father 's method of conversing .
One of the ladies observed , that this hall would be a charming place for music .
Bab brought in harps and harpers , and the harpers ' ball , in a breath .
`` I know so much about it , -- about the ball I mean , '' said she , `` because a lady in Shrewsbury , a friend of papa 's , offered to take me with her ; but papa did not like to give her the trouble of sending so far for me , though she has a coach of her own . ''
Barbara fixed her eyes upon Miss Somers as she spoke ; but she could not read her countenance as distinctly as she wished , because Miss Somers was at this moment letting down the veil of her hat .
`` Shall we walk out before tea ? ''
said Miss Somers to her companions ; `` I have a pretty guinea-hen to show you . ''
Barbara , secretly drawing propitious omens from the guinea-hen , followed with a confidential step .
The pheasantry was well filled with pheasants , peacocks , etc. , and Susan 's pretty little guinea-hen appeared well , even in this high company .
It was much admired .
Barbara was in glory ; but her glory was of short duration .
Just as Miss Somers was going to inquire into the guinea-hen 's history , Philip came up , to ask permission to have a bit of sycamore , to turn a nutmeg box for his mother .
He was an ingenious lad , and a good turner for his age .
Sir Arthur had put by a bit of sycamore , on purpose for him ; and Miss Somers told him where it was to be found .
He thanked her : but in the midst of his bow of thanks his eye was struck by the sight of the guinea-hen , and he involuntarily exclaimed , `` Susan 's guinea-hen , I declare ! ''
`` No , it 's not Susan 's guinea-hen , '' said Miss Barbara , colouring furiously ; `` it is mine , and I have made a present of it to Miss Somers . ''
At the sound of Bab 's voice , Philip turned -- saw her -- and indignation , unrestrained by the presence of all the amazed spectators , flashed in his countenance .
`` What is the matter , Philip ? ''
said Miss Somers , in a pacifying tone ; but Philip was not inclined to be pacified .
`` Why , ma'am , '' said he , `` may I speak out ? ''
and , without waiting for permission , he spoke out , and gave a full , true , and warm account of Rose 's embassy , and of Miss Barbara's cruel and avaricious proceedings .
Barbara denied , prevaricated , stammered , and at last was overcome with confusion ; for which even the most indulgent spectators could scarcely pity her .
Miss Somers , however , mindful of what was due to her guest , was anxious to dispatch Philip for his piece of sycamore .
Bab recovered herself as soon as he was out of sight ; but she further exposed herself by exclaiming , `` I 'm sure I wish this pitiful guinea-hen had never come into my possession .
I wish Susan had kept it at home , as she should have done ! ''
`` Perhaps she will be more careful now that she has received so strong a lesson , '' said Miss Somers .
`` Shall we try her ? ''
continued she .
`` Philip will , I daresay , take the guinea-hen back to Susan , if we desire it . ''
`` If you please , ma'am , '' said Barbara , sullenly ; `` I have nothing more to do with it . ''
So the guinea-hen was delivered to Philip , who set off joyfully with his prize , and was soon in sight of Farmer Price 's cottage .
He stopped when he came to the door .
He recollected Rose and her generous friendship for Susan .
He was determined that she should have the pleasure of restoring the guinea-hen .
He ran into the village .
All the children who had given up their little purse on May day were assembled on the play-green .
They were delighted to see the guinea-hen once more .
Philip took his pipe and tabor , and they marched in innocent triumph towards the whitewashed cottage .
`` Let me come with you -- let me come with you , '' said the butcher 's boy to Philip .
`` Stop one minute !
my father has something to say to you . ''
He darted into his father 's house .
The little procession stopped , and in a few minutes the bleating of a lamb was heard .
Through a back passage , which led into the paddock behind the house , they saw the butcher leading a lamb .
`` It is Daisy ! ''
exclaimed Rose -- '' It 's Daisy ! ''
repeated all her companions .
`` Susan 's lamb !
Susan 's lamb ! ''
and there was a universal shout of joy .
`` Well , for my part , '' said the good butcher , as soon as he could be heard , -- '' for my part , I would not be so cruel as Attorney Case for the whole world .
These poor brute beasts do n't know aforehand what 's going to happen to them ; and as for dying , it 's what we must all do some time or another ; but to keep wringing the hearts of the living , that have as much sense as one 's self , is what I call cruel ; and is not this what Attorney Case has been doing by poor Susan and her whole family , ever since he took a spite against them ?
But , at anyrate , here 's Susan 's lamb safe and sound .
I 'd have taken it back sooner , but I was off before day to the fair , and am but just come back .
Daisy , however , has been as well off in my paddock as he would have been in the field by the waterside . ''
The obliging shopkeeper , who showed the pretty calicoes to Susan , was now at his door , and when he saw the lamb , and heard that it was Susan 's , and learned its history , he said that he would add his mite ; and he gave the children some ends of narrow riband , with which Rose decorated her friend 's lamb .
The pipe and tabor now once more began to play , and the procession moved on in joyful order , after giving the humane butcher three cheers ; three cheers which were better deserved than `` loud huzzas '' usually are .
Susan was working in her arbour , with her little deal table before her .
When she heard the sound of the music , she put down her work and listened .
She saw the crowd of children coming nearer and nearer .
They had closed round Daisy , so that she did not see it ; but as they came up to the garden gate she saw that Rose beckoned to her .
Philip played as loud as he could , that she might not hear , till the proper moment , the bleating of the lamb .
Susan opened the garden-wicket , and at this signal the crowd divided , and the first thing that Susan saw , in the midst of her taller friends , was little smiling Mary , with the guinea-hen in her arms .
`` Come on !
Come on ! ''
cried Mary , as Susan started with joyful surprise ; '' you have more to see . ''
At this instant the music paused , Susan heard the bleating of a lamb , and scarcely daring to believe her senses , she pressed eagerly forward , and beheld poor Daisy ! -- she burst into tears .
`` I did not shed one tear when I parted with you , my dear little Daisy ! ''
said she .
`` It was for my father and mother .
I would not have parted with you for anything else in the whole world .
Thank you , thank you all , '' added she , to her companions , who sympathized in her joy , even more than they had sympathized in her sorrow .
`` Now , if my father was not to go away from us next week , and if my mother was quite stout , I should be the happiest person in the world ! ''
As Susan pronounced these words , a voice behind the little listening crowd cried , in a brutal tone , `` Let us pass , if you please ; you have no right to stop up the public road ! ''
This was the voice of Attorney Case , who was returning with his daughter Barbara from his visit to the Abbey .
He saw the lamb , and tried to whistle as he went on .
Barbara also saw the guinea-hen , and turned her head another way , that she might avoid the contemptuous , reproachful looks of those whom she only affected to despise .
Even her new bonnet , in which she had expected to be so much admired , was now only serviceable to hide her face and conceal her mortification .
`` I am glad she saw the guinea-hen , '' cried Rose , who now held it in her hands .
`` Yes , '' said Philip , `` she 'll not forget May day in a hurry . ''
`` Nor I neither , I hope , '' said Susan , looking round upon her companions with a most affectionate smile : `` I hope , whilst I live , I shall never forget your goodness to me last May day .
Now I 've my pretty guinea-hen safe once more , I should think of returning your money . ''
`` No !
no !
no ! ''
was the general cry .
`` We do n't want the money -- keep it , keep it -- you want it for your father . ''
`` Well , '' said Susan , `` I am not too proud to be obliged .
I WILL keep your money for my father .
Perhaps some time or other I may be able to earn -- '' '' Oh , '' interrupted Philip , `` do n't let us talk of earning ; do n't let us talk to her of money now ; she has not had time hardly to look at poor Daisy and her guinea-hen .
Come , we must go about our business , and let her have them all to herself . ''
The crowd moved away in consequence of Philip 's considerate advice : but it was observed that he was the very last to stir from the garden-wicket himself .
He stayed , first , to inform Susan that it was Rose who tied the ribands on Daisy 's head .
Then he stayed a little longer to let her into the history of the guinea-hen , and to tell her who it was that brought the hen home from the Abbey .
Rose held the sieve , and Susan was feeding her long lost favourite , whilst Philip leaned over the wicket , prolonging his narration .
`` Now , my pretty guinea-hen , '' said Susan -- '' my naughty guinea-hen , that flew away from me , you shall never serve me so again .
I must cut your nice wings ; but I wo n't hurt you . ''
`` Take care , '' cried Philip ; `` you 'd better , indeed you 'd better let me hold her whilst you cut her wings . ''
When this operation was successfully performed , which it certainly could never have been if Philip had not held the hen for Susan , he recollected that his mother had sent him with a message to Mrs .
Price .
This message led to another quarter of an hour 's delay ; for he had the whole history of the guinea-hen to tell over again to Mrs .
Price , and the farmer himself luckily came in whilst it was going on , so it was but civil to begin it afresh ; and then the farmer was so rejoiced to see his Susan so happy again with her two little favourites that he declared he must see Daisy fed himself ; and Philip found that he was wanted to hold the jug full of milk , out of which Farmer Price filled the pan for Daisy ?
Happy Daisy !
who lapped at his ease , whilst Susan caressed him , and thanked her fond father and her pleased mother .
`` But , Philip , '' said Mrs .
Price , `` I 'll hold the jug -- you 'll be late with your message to your mother ; we 'll not detain you any longer . ''
Philip departed , and as he went out of the garden-wicket , he looked up , and saw Bab and her maid Betty staring out of the window , as usual .
On this , he immediately turned back to try whether he had shut the gate fast , lest the guinea-hen might stray out , and fall again into the hands of the enemy .
Miss Barbara , in the course of this day , felt considerable mortification , but no contrition .
She was vexed that her meanness was discovered , but she felt no desire to cure herself of any of her faults .
The ball was still uppermost in her vain , selfish soul .
`` Well , '' said she to her confidante , Betty , `` you hear how things have turned out ; but if Miss Somers wo n't think of asking me to go out with her , I 've a notion I know who will .
As papa says , it 's a good thing to have two strings to one's bow . ''
Now , some officers , who were quartered at Shrewsbury , had become acquainted with Mr .
Case .
They had gotten into some quarrel with a tradesman of the town , and Attorney Case had promised to bring them through the affair , as the man threatened to take the law of them .
Upon the faith of this promise , and with the vain hope that , by civility , they might dispose him to bring in a REASONABLE bill of costs , these officers sometimes invited Mr .
Case to the mess ; and one of them , who had lately been married , prevailed upon his bride SOMETIMES to take a little notice of Miss Barbara .
It was with this lady that Miss Barbara now hoped to go to the harpers ' ball .
`` The officers and Mrs .
Strathspey , or , more properly , Mrs .
Strathspey and the officers , are to breakfast here , tomorrow , do you know , '' said Bab to Betty .
`` One of them dined at the Abbey , to-day , and told papa that they 'd all come .
They are going out on a party , somewhere into the country , and breakfast here on their way .
Pray , Betty , do n't forget that Mrs .
Strathspey ca n't breakfast without honey .
I heard her say so myself . ''
`` Then , indeed , '' said Betty , `` I 'm afraid Mrs .
Strathspey will be likely to go without her breakfast here ; for not a spoonful of honey have we , let her long for it ever so much . ''
`` But , surely , '' said Bab , `` we can contrive to get some honey in the neighbourhood . ''
`` There 's none to be bought , as I know of , '' said Betty .
`` But is there none to be begged or borrowed ? ''
said Bab , laughing .
`` Do you forget Susan 's beehive ?
Step over to her in the morning with MY COMPLIMENTS , and see what you can do .
Tell her it 's for Mrs .
Strathspey . ''
In the morning Betty went with Miss Barbara 's compliments to Susan , to beg some honey for Mrs .
Strathspey , who could not breakfast without it .
Susan did not like to part with her honey , because her mother loved it , and she therefore gave Betty but a small quantity .
When Barbara saw how little Susan sent , she called her A MISER , and she said she MUST have some more for Mrs .
Strathspey .
`` I 'll go myself and speak to her .
Come with me , Betty , '' said the young lady , who found it at present convenient to forget her having declared , the day that she sucked up the broth , that she never would honour Susan with another visit .
`` Susan , '' said she , accosting the poor girl , whom she had done everything in her power to injure , `` I must beg a little more honey from you for Mrs .
Strathspey's breakfast .
You know , on a particular occasion such as this , neighbours must help one another . ''
`` To be sure they should , '' added Betty .
Susan , though she was generous , was not weak ; she was willing to give to those she loved , but not disposed to let anything be taken from her , or coaxed out of her , by those she had reason to despise .
She civilly answered , that she was sorry she had no more honey to spare .
Barbara grew angry , and lost all command of herself , when she saw that Susan , without regarding her reproaches , went on looking through the glass pane in the beehive .
`` I 'll tell you what , Susan Price , '' said she , in a high tone , `` the honey I WILL have , so you may as well give it to me by fair means .
Yes or no !
Speak !
Will you give it me or not ?
Will you give me that piece of the honey-comb that lies there ? ''
`` That bit of honey-comb is for my mother 's breakfast , '' said Susan ; `` I can not give it you . ''
`` Ca n't you ? ''
said Bab , `` then see if I do n't take it ! ''
She stretched across Susan for the honey-comb , which was lying by some rosemary leaves that Susan had freshly gathered for her mother 's tea .
Bab grasped , but at her first effort she only reached the rosemary .
She made a second dart at the honey-comb , and , in her struggle to obtain it , she overset the beehive .
The bees swarmed about her .
Her maid Betty screamed and ran away .
Susan , who was sheltered by a laburnum tree , called to Barbara , upon whom the black clusters of bees were now settling , and begged her to stand still , and not to beat them away .
`` If you stand quietly you wo n't be stung , perhaps . ''
But instead of standing quietly , Bab buffeted and stamped and roared , and the bees stung her terribly .
Her arms and her face swelled in a frightful manner .
She was helped home by poor Susan and treacherous Mrs .
Betty , who , now the mischief was done , thought only of exculpating herself to her master .
`` Indeed , Miss Barbara , '' said she , `` this was quite wrong of you to go and get yourself into such a scrape .
I shall be turned away for it , you'll see . ''
`` I do n't care whether you are turned away or not , '' said Barbara ; `` I never felt such pain in my life .
Ca n't you do something for me ?
I do n't mind the pain either so much as being such a fright .
Pray , how am I to be fit to be seen at breakfast by Mrs .
Strathspey ; and I suppose I ca n't go to the ball either to-morrow , after all ! ''
`` No , that you ca n't expect to do , indeed , '' said Betty , the comforter .
`` You need not think of balls ; for those lumps and swellings wo n't go off your face this week .
That 's not what pains me ; but I 'm thinking of what your papa will say to me when he sees you , miss . ''
Whilst this amiable mistress and maid were in their adversity reviling one another , Susan , when she saw that she could be of no further use , was preparing to depart , but at the house-door , she was met by Mr .
Case .
Mr .
Case had revolved things in his mind ; for his second visit at the Abbey pleased him as little as his first , owing to a few words which Sir Arthur and Miss Somers dropped in speaking of Susan and Farmer Price .
Mr .
Case began to fear that he had mistaken his game in quarrelling with this family .
The refusal of his present dwelt upon the attorney 's mind ; and he was aware that , if the history of Susan 's lamb ever reached the Abbey , he was undone .
He now thought that the most prudent course he could possibly follow would be to HUSH UP matters with the Prices with all convenient speed .
Consequently , when he met Susan at his door , he forced a gracious smile .
`` How is your mother , Susan ? ''
said he .
`` Is there anything in our house can be of service to her ? ''
On hearing his daughter he cried out , `` Barbara , Barbara -- Bab !
come downstairs , child , and speak to Susan Price . ''
But as no Barbara answered , her father stalked upstairs directly , opened the door , and stood amazed at the spectacle of her swelled visage .
Betty instantly began to tell the story of Barbara 's mishap her own way .
Bab contradicted her as fast as she spoke .
The attorney turned the maid away on the spot ; and partly with real anger , and partly with feigned affectation of anger , he demanded from his daughter how she dared to treat Susan Price so ill , `` when , '' as he said , `` she was so neighbourly and obliging as to give you some of her honey ?
Could n't you be content , without seizing upon the honey-comb by force ?
This is scandalous behaviour , and what , I assure you , I ca n't countenance . ''
Susan now interceded for Barbara ; and the attorney , softening his voice , said that `` Susan was a great deal too good to her ; as you are , indeed , '' added he , `` to everybody .
I forgive her for your sake . ''
Susan curtsied , in great surprise ; but her lamb could not be forgotten , and she left the attorney 's house as soon as she could , to make her mother 's rosemary tea breakfast .
Mr .
Case saw that Susan was not so simple as to be taken in by a few fair words .
His next attempt was to conciliate Farmer Price .
The farmer was a blunt , honest man , and his countenance remained inflexibly contemptuous , when the attorney addressed him in his softest tone .
So stood matters the day of the long expected harpers ' ball .
Miss Barbara Case , stung by Susan 's bees , could not , after all her manoeuvres , go with Mrs .
Strathspey to the ball .
The ballroom was filled early in the evening .
There was a numerous assembly .
The harpers , who contended for the prize , were placed under the music-gallery at the lower end of the room .
Amongst them was our old blind friend , who , as he was not so well clad as his competitors , seemed to be disdained by many of the spectators .
Six ladies and six gentlemen were now appointed to be judges of the performance .
They were seated in a semicircle , opposite to the harpers .
The Miss Somerses , who were fond of music , were amongst the ladies in the semicircle ; and the prize was lodged in the hands of Sir Arthur .
There was now silence .
The first harp sounded , and as each musician tried his skill , the audience seemed to think that each deserved the prize .
The old blind man was the last .
He tuned his instrument ; and such a simple , pathetic strain was heard as touched every heart .
All were fixed in delighted attention ; and when the music ceased , the silence for some moments continued .
The silence was followed by a universal buzz of applause .
The judges were unanimous in their opinions , and it was declared that the old blind harper , who played the last , deserved the prize .
The simple , pathetic air which won the suffrages of the whole assembly , was his own composition .
He was pressed to give the words belonging to the music ; and at last he modestly offered to repeat them , as he could not see to write .
Miss Somers ' ready pencil was instantly produced ; and the old harper dictated the words of his ballad , which he called -- '' Susan 's Lamentation for her Lamb . ''
Miss Somers looked at her brother from time to time , as she wrote ; and Sir Arthur , as soon as the old man had finished , took him aside , and asked him some questions , which brought the whole history of Susan 's lamb and of Attorney Case 's cruelty to light .
The attorney himself was present when the harper began to dictate his ballad .
His colour , as Sir Arthur steadily looked at him , varied continually ; till at length , when he heard the words `` Susan 's Lamentation for her Lamb , '' he suddenly shrunk back , skulked through the crowd , and disappeared .
We shall not follow him ; we had rather follow our old friend , the victorious harper .
No sooner had he received the ten guineas , his well merited prize , than he retired to a small room belonging to the people of the house , asked for pen , ink and paper , and dictated , in a low voice , to his boy , who was a tolerably good scribe , a letter , which he ordered him to put directly into the Shrewsbury post-office .
The boy ran with the letter to the post-office .
He was but just in time , for the postman 's horn was sounding .
The next morning , when Farmer Price , his wife , and Susan , were sitting together , reflecting that his week 's leave of absence was nearly at an end , and that the money was not yet made up for John Simpson , the substitute , a knock was heard at the door , and the person who usually delivered the letters in the village put a letter into Susan 's hand , saying , `` A penny , if you please -- here 's a letter for your father . ''
`` For me ! ''
said Farmer Price ; `` here 's the penny then , but who can it be from , I wonder ?
Who can think of writing to me , in this world ? ''
He tore open the letter ; but the hard name at the bottom of the page puzzled him- - '' your obliged friend , Llewellyn . ''
`` And what 's this ? ''
said he , opening a paper that was inclosed in the letter .
`` It 's a song , seemingly ; it must be somebody that has a mind to make an April fool of me . ''
`` But it is not April , it is May , father , '' said Susan .
`` Well , let us read the letter , and we shall come to the truth all in good time . ''
Farmer Price sat down in his own chair , for he could not read entirely to his satisfaction in any other , and read as follows : -- '' MY WORTHY FRIEND , -- I am sure you will be glad to hear that I have had good success this night .
I have won the ten guinea prize , and for that I am in a great measure indebted to your sweet daughter Susan ; as you will see by a little ballad I inclose for her .
Your hospitality to me has afforded to me an opportunity of learning some of your family history .
You do not , I hope , forget that I was present when you were counting the treasure in Susan 's little purse , and that I heard for what purpose it was all destined .
You have not , I know , yet made up the full sum for your substitute , John Simpson ; therefore do me the favour to use the five guinea bank note which you will find within the ballad .
You shall not find me as hard a creditor as Attorney Case .
Pay me the money at your own convenience .
If it is never convenient to you to pay it , I shall never ask it .
I shall go my rounds again through this country , I believe , about this time next year , and will call to see how you do , and to play the new tune for Susan and the dear little boys .
`` I should just add , to set your heart at rest about the money , that it does not distress me at all to lend it to you .
I am not quite so poor as I appear to be .
But it is my humour to go about as I do .
I see more of the world under my tattered garb than , perhaps , I should ever see in a better dress .
There are many of my profession who are of the same mind as myself in this respect ; and we are glad , when it lies in our way , to do any kindness to such a worthy family as yours. -- So , fare ye well .
`` Your obliged Friend , `` LLEWELLYN . ''
Susan now , by her father 's desire , opened the ballad .
He picked up the five guinea bank note , whilst she read , with surprise , `` Susan's Lamentation for her Lamb . ''
Her mother leaned over her shoulder to read the words ; but they were interrupted , before they had finished the first stanza , by another knock at the door .
It was not the postman with another letter .
It was Sir Arthur and his sisters .
They came with an intention , which they were much disappointed to find that the old harper had rendered vain -- they came to lend the farmer and his good family the money to pay for his substitute .
`` But , since we are here , '' said Sir Arthur , `` let me do my own business , which I had like to have forgotten .
Mr .
Price , will you come out with me , and let me show you a piece of your land , through which I want to make a road .
Look there , '' said Sir Arthur , pointing to the spot , `` I am laying out a ride round my estate , and that bit of land of yours stops me . ''
`` Why , sir , '' said Price , `` the land 's mine , to be sure , for that matter ; but I hope you do n't look upon me to be that sort of person that would be stiff about a trifle or so . ''
`` The fact is , '' said Sir Arthur , `` I had heard you were a litigious , pig- headed fellow ; but you do not seem to deserve this character . ''
`` Hope not , sir , '' said the farmer ; `` but about the matter of the land , I do n't want to take any advantage of your wishing for it .
You are welcome to it ; and I leave it to you to find me out another bit of land convenient to me that will be worth neither more nor less ; or else to make up the value to me some way or other .
I need say no more about it . ''
`` I hear something , '' continued Sir Arthur , after a short silence -- '' I hear something , Mr .
Price , of a FLAW in your lease .
I would not speak to you about it whilst we were bargaining about your land , lest I should over- awe you ; but , tell me , what is this flaw ? ''
`` In truth , and the truth is the fittest thing to be spoken at all times , '' said the farmer , `` I did n't know myself what a flaw , as they call it , meant , till I heard of the word from Attorney Case ; and , I take it , a flaw is neither more nor less than a mistake , as one should say .
Now , by reason a man does not make a mistake on purpose , it seems to me to be the fair thing , that if a man finds out his mistake , he might set it right ; but Attorney Case says this is not law ; and I 've no more to say .
The man who drew up my lease made a mistake ; and if I must suffer for it , I must , '' said the farmer .
`` However , I can show you , Sir Arthur , just for my own satisfaction and yours , a few lines of a memorandum on a slip of paper , which was given me by your relation , the gentleman who lived here before , and let me my farm .
You 'll see , by that bit of paper , what was meant ; but the attorney says , the paper 's not worth a button in a court of justice , and I do n't understand these things .
All I understand is the common honesty of the matter .
I 've no more to say . ''
`` This attorney , whom you speak of so often , '' said Sir Arthur , `` you seem to have some quarrel with .
Now , would you tell me frankly what is the matter between -- ? ''
`` The matter between us , then , '' said Price , `` is a little bit of ground , not worth much , that is there open to the lane at the end of Mr .
Case's garden , sir , and he wanted to take it in .
Now I told him my mind , that it belonged to the parish , and that I never would willingly give my consent to his cribbing it in that way .
Sir , I was the more loath to see it shut into his garden , which , moreover , is large enough of all conscience without it , because you must know , Sir Arthur , the children in our village are fond of making a little play-green of it ; and they have a custom of meeting on May day at a hawthorn that stands in the middle of it , and altogether I was very loath to see 'em turned out of it by those who have no right . ''
`` Let us go and see this nook , '' said Sir Arthur .
`` It is not far off , is it ? ''
`` Oh , no , sir , just hard by here . ''
When they got to the ground , Mr .
Case , who saw them walking together , was in a hurry to join them , that he might put a stop to any explanations .
Explanations were things of which he had a great dread ; but , fortunately , he was upon this occasion a little too late .
`` Is this the nook in dispute ? ''
said Sir Arthur .
`` Yes ; this is the whole thing , '' said Price .
`` Why , Sir Arthur , '' interposed the politic attorney , with an assumed air of generosity , `` do n't let us talk any more about it .
Let it belong to whom it will , I give it up to you . ''
`` So great a lawyer , Mr .
Case , as you are , '' replied Sir Arthur , `` must know , that a man can not give up that to which he has no legal title ; and in this case it is impossible that , with the best intentions to oblige me in the world , you can give up this bit of land to me , because it is mine already , as I can convince you effectually by a map of the adjoining land , which I have fortunately safe amongst my papers .
This piece of ground belonged to the farm on the opposite side of the road , and it was cut off when the lane was made . ''
`` Very possibly .
I daresay you are quite correct ; you must know best , '' said the attorney , trembling for the agency .
`` Then , '' said Sir Arthur , `` Mr .
Price , you will observe that I now promise this little green to the children for a play-ground ; and I hope they may gather hawthorn many a May day at this their favourite bush . ''
Mr .
Price bowed low , which he seldom did , even when he received a favour himself .
`` And now , Mr .
Case , '' said Sir Arthur , turning to the attorney , who did not know which way to look , `` you sent me a lease to look over . ''
`` Ye-ye-yes , '' stammered Mr Case .
`` I thought it my duty to do so ; not out of any malice or ill-will to this good man . ''
`` You have done him no injury , '' said Sir Arthur , coolly .
`` I am ready to make him a new lease , whenever he pleases , of his farm , and I shall be guided by a memorandum of the original bargain , which he has in his possession .
I hope I never shall take an unfair advantage of anyone . ''
`` Heaven forbid , sir , '' said the attorney , sanctifying his face , `` that I should suggest the taking an UNFAIR advantage of any man , rich or poor ; but to break a bad lease is not taking an unfair advantage . ''
`` You really think so ? ''
said Sir Arthur .
`` Certainly I do , and I hope I have not hazarded your good opinion by speaking my mind concerning the flaw so plainly .
I always understood that there could be nothing ungentlemanlike , in the way of business , in taking advantage of a flaw in a lease . ''
`` Now , '' said Sir Arthur , `` you have pronounced judgment undesignedly in your own case .
You intended to send me this poor man 's lease ; but your son , by some mistake , brought me your own , and I have discovered a fatal error in it . ''
`` A fatal error ! ''
said the alarmed attorney .
`` Yes , sir , '' said Sir Arthur , pulling the lease out of his pocket .
`` Here it is .
You will observe that it is neither signed nor sealed by the grantor . ''
`` But , you wo n't take advantage of me , surely , Sir Arthur ? ''
said Mr .
Case , forgetting his own principles .
`` I shall not take advantage of you , as you would have taken of this honest man .
In both cases I shall be guided by memoranda which I have in my possession .
I shall not , Mr .
Case , defraud you of one shilling of your property .
I am ready , at a fair valuation , to pay the exact value of your house and land ; but upon this condition -- that you quit the parish within one month ! ''
Attorney Case was thus compelled to submit to the hard necessity of the case , for he knew that he could not legally resist .
Indeed he was glad to be let off so easily ; and he bowed and sneaked away , secretly comforting himself with the hope , that when they came to the valuation of the house and land he should be the gainer , perhaps of a few guineas .
His reputation he justly held very cheap .
`` You are a scholar ; you write a good hand ; you can keep accounts , can not you ? ''
said Sir Arthur to Mr .
Price , as they walked home towards the cottage .
`` I think I saw a bill of your little daughter 's drawing out the other day , which was very neatly written .
Did you teach her to write ? ''
`` No , sir , '' said Price , `` I ca n't say I did THAT ; for she mostly taught it herself , but I taught her a little arithmetic , as far as I knew , on our winter nights , when I had nothing better to do . ''
`` Your daughter shows that she has been well taught , '' said Sir Arthur ; '' and her good conduct and good character speak strongly in favour of her parents . ''
`` You are very good , very good indeed , sir , to speak in this sort of way , '' said the delighted father .
`` But I mean to do more than PAY YOU WITH WORDS , '' said Sir Arthur .
`` You are attached to your own family , perhaps you may become attached to me , when you come to know me , and we shall have frequent opportunities of judging of one another .
I want no agent to squeeze my tenants , or do my dirty work .
I only want a steady , intelligent , honest man , like you , to collect my rents , and I hope , Mr .
Price , you will have no objection to the employment . ''
`` I hope , sir , '' said Price , with joy and gratitude glowing in his honest countenance , `` that you 'll never have cause to repent your goodness . ''
`` And what are my sisters about here ? ''
said Sir Arthur , entering the cottage , and going behind his sisters , who were busily engaged in measuring an extremely pretty coloured calico .
`` It is for Susan , my dear brother , '' said they .
`` I know she did not keep that guinea for herself , '' said Miss Somers .
`` I have just prevailed upon her mother to tell me what became of it .
Susan gave it to her father ; but she must not refuse a gown of our choosing this time ; and I am sure she will not , because her mother , I see , likes it .
And , Susan , I hear that instead of becoming Queen of the May this year , you were sitting in your sick mother 's room .
Your mother has a little colour in her cheeks now . ''
`` Oh , ma'am , '' interrupted Mrs .
Price , `` I 'm quite well .
Joy , I think , has made me quite well . ''
`` Then , '' said Miss Somers , `` I hope you will be able to come out on your daughter 's birthday , which , I hear , is the 25th of this month .
Make haste and get quite well before that day ; for my brother intends that all the lads and lassies of the village shall have a dance on Susan's birthday . ''
`` Yes , '' said Sir Arthur , `` and I hope on that day , Susan , you will be very happy with your little friends upon their play-green .
I shall tell them that it is your good conduct which has obtained it for them ; and if you have anything to ask , any little favour for any of your companions , which we can grant , now ask , Susan .
These ladies look as if they would not refuse you anything that is reasonable ; and , I think , you look as if you would not ask anything unreasonable . ''
`` Sir , '' said Susan , after consulting her mother 's eyes , `` there is , to be sure , a favour I should like to ask ; it is for Rose . ''
`` Well , I do n't know who Rose is , '' said Sir Arthur , smiling ; `` but , go on . ''
`` Ma'am , you have seen her , I believe ; she is a very good girl , indeed , '' said Mrs .
Price .
`` And works very neatly , indeed , '' continued Susan , eagerly , to Miss Somers ; `` and she and her mother heard you were looking out for someone to wait upon you . ''
`` Say no more , '' said Miss Somers ; `` your wish is granted .
Tell Rose to come to the Abbey , to-morrow morning , or , rather , come with her yourself ; for our housekeeper , I know , wants to talk to you about a certain cake .
She wishes , Susan , that you should be the maker of the cake for the dance ; and she has good things ready looked out for it already , I know .
It must be large enough for everybody to have a slice , and the housekeeper will ice it for you .
I only hope your cake will be as good as your bread .
Fare ye well . ''
How happy are those who bid farewell to a whole family , silent with gratitude , who will bless them aloud when they are far out of hearing !
`` How do I wish , now , '' said Farmer Price , `` and it 's almost a sin for one that has had such a power of favours done him , to wish for anything more ; but how I DO wish , wife , that our good friend , the harper was only here at this time .
It would do his old , warm heart good .
Well , the best of it is , we shall be able next year , when he comes his rounds , to pay him his money with thanks , being all the time , and for ever , as much obliged to him as if we kept it .
I long , so I do , to see him in this house again , drinking , as he did , just in this spot , a glass of Susan 's mead , to her very good health . ''
`` Yes , '' said Susan , `` and the next time he comes , I can give him one of my guinea-hen 's eggs , and I shall show my lamb , Daisy . ''
`` True , love , '' said her mother , `` and he will play that tune and sing that pretty ballad .
Where is it ?
for I have not finished it . ''
`` Rose ran away with it , mother , but I 'll step after her , and bring it back to you this minute , '' said Susan .
Susan found her friend Rose at the hawthorn , in the midst of a crowded circle of her companions , to whom she was reading `` Susan 's Lamentation for her Lamb . ''
`` The words are something , but the tune -- the tune -- I must have the tune , '' cried Philip .
`` I 'll ask my mother to ask Sir Arthur to try and find out which way that good old man went after the ball ; and if he 's above ground , we 'll have him back by Susan 's birthday , and he shall sit here -- just exactly here by this , our bush , and he shall play -- I mean , if he pleases -- that same tune for us , and I shall learn it -- I mean , if I can -- in a minute . ''
The good news that Farmer Price was to be employed to collect the rents , and that Attorney Case was to leave the parish in a month , soon spread over the village .
Many came out of their houses to have the pleasure of hearing the joyful tidings confirmed by Susan herself .
The crowd on the play-green increased every minute .
`` Yes , '' cried the triumphant Philip , `` I tell you it 's all true , every word of it .
Susan 's too modest to say it herself ; but I tell ye all , Sir Arthur gave us this play-green for ever , on account of her being so good . ''
You see , at last Attorney Case , with all his cunning has not proved a match for `` Simple Susan . ''
THE WHITE PIGEON .
The little town of Somerville , in Ireland , has , within these few years , assumed the neat and cheerful appearance of an English village .
Mr .
Somerville , to whom this town belongs , wished to inspire his tenantry with a taste for order and domestic happiness , and took every means in his power to encourage industrious , well behaved people to settle in his neighbourhood .
When he had finished building a row of good slated houses in his town , he declared that he would let them to the best tenants he could find , and proposals were publicly sent to him from all parts of the country .
By the best tenants , Mr .
Somerville did not , however , mean the best bidders ; and many , who had offered an extravagant price for the houses , were surprised to find their proposals rejected .
Amongst these was Mr .
Cox , an alehouse keeper , who did not bear a very good character .
`` Please your honour , sir , '' said he to Mr .
Somerville , `` I expected , since I bid as fair and fairer for it than any other , that you would have let me the house next the apothecary 's .
Was not it fifteen guineas I mentioned in my proposal ?
and did not your honour give it against me for thirteen ? ''
`` My honour did just so , '' replied Mr .
Somerville , calmly .
`` And please your honour , but I do n't know what it is I or mine have done to offend you .
I 'm sure there is not a gentleman in all Ireland I 'd go further to sarve .
Would not I go to Cork to-morrow for the least word from your honour ? ''
`` I am much obliged to you , Mr .
Cox , but I have no business at Cork at present , '' answered Mr .
Somerville , drily .
`` It is all I wish , '' exclaimed Mr .
Cox , `` that I could find out and light upon the man that has belied me to your honour . ''
`` No man has belied you , Mr .
Cox , but your nose belies you much , if you do not love drinking a little , and your black eye and cut chin belie you much if you do not love quarrelling a little . ''
`` Quarrel !
I quarrel , please your honour !
I defy any man , or set of men , ten mile round , to prove such a thing , and I am ready to fight him that dares to say the like of me .
I 'd fight him here in your honour's presence , if he 'd only come out this minute , and meet me like a man . ''
Here Mr .
Cox put himself into a boxing attitude , but observing that Mr .
Somerville looked at his threatening gesture with a smile , and that several people , who had gathered round him as he stood in the street , laughed at the proof he gave of his peaceable disposition , he changed his attitude , and went on to vindicate himself against the charge of drinking .
`` And as to drink , please your honour , there 's no truth in it .
Not a drop of whisky , good or bad , have I touched these six months , except what I took with Jemmy M'Doole the night I had the misfortune to meet your honour coming home from the fair of Ballynagrish . ''
To this speech Mr .
Somerville made no answer , but turned away to look at the bow window of a handsome new inn , which the glazier was at this instant glazing .
`` Please your honour , that new inn is not let , I hear , as yet , '' resumed Mr .
Cox ; `` if your honour recollects , you promised to make me a compliment of it last Seraphtide was twelvemonth . ''
`` Impossible ! ''
cried Mr .
Somerville , `` for I had no thoughts of building an inn at that time . ''
`` Oh , I beg your honour 's pardon but if you 'd be just pleased to recollect , it was coming through the gap in the bog meadows , FORENENT Thady O'Connor , you made me the promise -- I 'll leave it to him , so I will . ''
`` But I will not leave it to him , I assure you , '' cried Mr .
Somerville ; `` I never made any such promise .
I never thought of letting this inn to you . ''
`` Then your honour wo n't let me have it ? ''
`` No , you have told me a dozen falsehoods .
I do not wish to have you for a tenant . ''
`` Well , God bless your honour ; I 've no more to say , but God bless your honour , '' said Mr .
Cox ; and he walked away , muttering to himself , as he slouched his hat over his face , `` I hope I 'll live to be revenged on him ! ''
Mr .
Somerville the next morning went with his family to look at the new inn , which he expected to see perfectly finished ; but he was met by the carpenter , who , with a rueful face , informed him that six panes of glass in the large bow-window had been broken during the night .
`` Ha !
perhaps Mr .
Cox has broken my windows , in revenge for my refusing to let him my house , '' said Mr .
Somerville ; and many of the neighbours , who knew the malicious character of this Mr .
Cox , observed that this was like one of his tricks .
A boy of about twelve years old , however , stepped forward and said , `` I do n't like Mr .
Cox , I 'm sure ; for once he beat me when he was drunk ; but , for all that , no one should be accused wrongfully .
He could not be the person that broke these windows last night , for he was six miles off .
He slept at his cousin 's last night , and he has not returned home yet .
So I think he knows nothing of the matter . ''
Mr .
Somerville was pleased with the honest simplicity of this boy , and observing that he looked in eagerly at the staircase , when the house door was opened , he asked him whether he would like to go in and see the new house .
`` Yes , sir , '' said the boy , `` I should like to go up those stairs , and to see what I should come to . ''
`` Up with you , then ! ''
said Mr .
Somerville ; and the boy ran up the stairs .
He went from room to room with great expressions of admiration and delight .
At length , as he was examining one of the garrets , he was startled by a fluttering noise over his head ; and looking up , he saw a white pigeon , who , frightened at his appearance , began to fly round and round the room , till it found its way out of the door , and flew into the staircase .
The carpenter was speaking to Mr .
Somerville upon the landing-place of the stairs ; but , the moment he spied the white pigeon , he broke off in the midst of a speech about THE NOSE of the stairs , and exclaimed , `` There he is , please your honour !
There 's he that has done all the damage to our bow-window -- that 's the very same wicked white pigeon that broke the church windows last Sunday was se'nnight ; but he 's down for it now ; we have him safe , and I 'll chop his head off , as he deserves , this minute . ''
`` Stay !
O stay !
do n't chop his head off : he does not deserve it , '' cried the boy , who came running out of the garret with the greatest eagerness -- '' _I_ broke your window , sir , '' said he to Mr .
Somerville .
`` I broke your window with this ball ; but I did not know that I had done it , till this moment , I assure you , or I should have told you before .
Do n't chop his head off , '' added the boy to the carpenter , who had now the white pigeon in his hands .
`` No , '' said Mr .
Somerville , `` the pigeon 's head shall not be chopped off , nor yours either , my good boy , for breaking a window .
I am persuaded by your open , honest countenance , that you are speaking the truth ; but pray explain this matter to us ; for you have not made it quite clear .
How happened it that you could break my windows without knowing it ?
and how came you to find it out at last ? ''
`` Sir , '' said the boy , `` if you 'll come up here , I 'll show you all I know , and how I came to know it . ''
Mr .
Somerville followed the boy into the garret , who pointed to a pane of glass that was broken in a small window that looked out upon a piece of waste ground behind the house .
Upon this piece of waste ground the children of the village often used to play .
`` We were playing there at ball yesterday evening , '' continued the boy , addressing himself to Mr .
Somerville , `` and one of the lads challenged me to hit a mark in the wall , which I did ; but he said I did not hit it , and bade me give him up my ball as the forfeit .
This I would not do ; and when he began to wrestle with me for it , I threw the ball , as I thought , over the house .
He ran to look for it in the street , but could not find it , which I was very glad of ; but I was very sorry just now to find it myself lying upon this heap of shavings , sir , under this broken window ; for , as soon as I saw it lying there , I knew I must have been the person that broke the window ; and through this window came the white pigeon .
Here 's one of his white feathers sticking in the gap . ''
`` Yes , '' said the carpenter , `` and in the bow-window room below there's plenty of his feathers to be seen ; for I 've just been down to look .
It was the pigeon broke THEM windows , sure enough . ''
`` But he could not have got in had I not broke this little window , '' said the boy , eagerly ; `` and I am able to earn sixpence a day , and I 'll pay for all the mischief , and welcome .
The white pigeon belongs to a poor neighbour , a friend of ours , who is very fond of him , and I would not have him killed for twice as much money . ''
`` Take the pigeon , my honest , generous lad , '' said Mr .
Somerville , `` and carry him back to your neighbour .
I forgive him all the mischief he has done me , tell your friend , for your sake .
As to the rest , we can have the windows mended ; and do you keep all the sixpences you earn for yourself . ''
`` That 's what he never did yet , '' said the carpenter .
`` Many 's the sixpence he earns , but not a halfpenny goes into his own pocket : it goes every farthing to his poor father and mother .
Happy for them to have such a son ! ''
`` More happy for him to have such a father and mother , '' exclaimed the boy .
`` Their good days they took all the best care of me that was to be had for love or money , and would , if I would let them , go on paying for my schooling now , falling as they be in the world ; but I must learn to mind the shop now .
Good morning to you , sir ; and thank you kindly , '' said he to Mr .
Somerville .
`` And where does this boy live , and who are his father and mother ?
They can not live in town , '' said Mr .
Somerville , `` or I should have heard of them . ''
`` They are but just come into the town , please your honour , '' said the carpenter .
`` They lived formerly upon Counsellor O'Donnel 's estate ; but they were ruined , please your honour , by taking a joint lease with a man , who fell afterwards into bad company , ran out all he had , so could not pay the landlord ; and these poor people were forced to pay his share and their own too , which almost ruined them .
They were obliged to give up the land ; and now they have furnished a little shop in this town with what goods they could afford to buy with the money they got by the sale of their cattle and stock .
They have the good-will of all who know them ; and I am sure I hope they will do well .
The boy is very ready in the shop , though he said only that he could earn sixpence a day .
He writes a good hand , and is quick at casting up accounts , for his age .
Besides , he is likely to do well in the world , because he is never in idle company , and I 've known him since he was two foot high , and never heard of his telling a lie . ''
`` This is an excellent character of the boy , indeed , '' said Mr .
Somerville , '' and from his behaviour this morning I am inclined to think that he deserves all your praises . ''
Mr .
Somerville resolved to inquire more fully concerning this poor family , and to attend to their conduct himself , fully determined to assist them if he should find them such as they had been represented .
In the meantime , this boy , whose name was Brian O'Neill , went to return the white pigeon to its owner .
`` You have saved its life , '' said the woman to whom it belonged , `` and I 'll make you a present of it . ''
Brian thanked her ; and he from that day began to grow fond of the pigeon .
He always took care to scatter some oats for it in his father 's yard ; and the pigeon grew so tame at last that it would hop about the kitchen , and eat off the same trencher with the dog .
Brian , after the shop was shut up at night , used to amuse himself with reading some little books which the schoolmaster who formerly taught him arithmetic was so good as to lend him .
Amongst these he one evening met with a little book full of the history of birds and beasts ; he looked immediately to see whether the pigeon was mentioned amongst the birds , and , to his great joy , he found a full description and history of his favourite bird .
`` So , Brian , I see your schooling has not been thrown away upon you ; you like your book , I see , when you have no master over you to bid you read , '' said his father , when he came in and saw Brian reading his book very attentively .
`` Thank you for having me taught to read , father , '' said Brian .
`` Here I've made a great discovery : I 've found out in this book , little as it looks , father , a most curious way of making a fortune ; and I hope it will make your fortune , father ; and if you 'll sit down , I 'll tell it to you . ''
Mr .
O'Neill , in hopes of pleasing his son rather than in the expectation of having his fortune made , immediately sat down to listen ; and his son explained to him , that he had found in his book an account of pigeons who carried notes and letters : `` and , father , '' continued Brian , `` I find my pigeon is of this sort ; and I intend to make my pigeon carry messages .
Why should not he ?
If other pigeons have done so before him , I think he is as good , and , I daresay , will be as easy to teach as any pigeon in the world .
I shall begin to teach him to-morrow morning ; and then , father , you know people often pay a great deal for sending messengers ; and no boy can run , no horse can gallop , so fast as a bird can fly ; therefore the bird must be the best messenger , and I should be paid the best price .
Hey , father ? ''
`` To be sure , to be sure , my boy , '' said his father , laughing ; `` I wish you may make the best messenger in Ireland of your pigeon ; but all I beg , my dear boy , is that you wo n't neglect our shop for your pigeon ; for I 've a notion we have a better chance of making a fortune by the shop than by the white pigeon . ''
Brian never neglected the shop ; but in his leisure hours he amused himself with training his pigeon ; and after much patience he at last succeeded so well , that one day he went to his father and offered to send him word by his pigeon what beef was a pound in the market of Ballynagrish , where he was going .
`` The pigeon will be home long before me , father ; and he will come in at the kitchen window , and light upon the dresser ; then you must untie the little note which I shall have tied under his left wing , and you 'll know the price of beef directly . ''
The pigeon carried his message well ; and Brian was much delighted with his success .
He soon was employed by the neighbours , who were aroused by Brian 's fondness of his swift messenger ; and soon the fame of the white pigeon was spread amongst all who frequented the markets and fairs of Somerville .
At one of these fairs a set of men of desperate fortunes met to drink , and to concert plans of robberies .
Their place of meeting was at the ale-house of Mr .
Cox , the man who , as our readers may remember , was offended by Mr .
Somerville 's hinting that he was fond of drinking and of quarrelling , and who threatened vengeance for having been refused the new inn .
Whilst these men were talking over their scheme , one of them observed , that one of their companions was not arrived .
Another said , `` No . ''
`` He's six miles off , '' said another ; and a third wished that he could make him hear at that distance .
This turned the discourse upon the difficulties of sending messages secretly and quickly .
Cox 's son , a lad of about nineteen , who was one of this gang , mentioned the white carrier-pigeon , and he was desired to try all means to get it into his possession .
Accordingly , the next day young Cox went to Brian O'Neill , and tried , at first by persuasion and afterwards by threats , to prevail upon him to give up the pigeon .
Brian was resolute in his refusal , more especially when the petitioner began to bully him .
`` If we ca n't have it by fair means , we will by foul , '' said Cox ; and a few days afterwards the pigeon was gone .
Brian searched for it in vain -- inquired from all the neighbours if they had seen it , and applied , but to no purpose , to Cox .
He swore that he knew nothing about the matter .
But this was false , for it was he who during the night-time had stolen the white pigeon .
He conveyed it to his employers , and they rejoiced that they had gotten it into their possession , as they thought it would serve them for a useful messenger .
Nothing can be more shortsighted than cunning .
The very means which these people took to secure secrecy were the means of bringing their plots to light .
They endeavoured to teach the pigeon , which they had stolen , to carry messages for them in a part of the country at some distance from Somerville ; and when they fancied that it had forgotten its former habits , and its old master , they thought that they might venture to employ him nearer home .
The pigeon , however , had a better memory than they imagined .
They loosed him from a bag near the town of Ballynagrish in hopes that he would stop at the house of Cox 's cousin , which was on its road between Ballynagrish and Somerville .
But the pigeon , though he had been purposely fed at this house for a week before this trial , did not stop there , but flew on to his old master 's house in Somerville , and pecked at the kitchen window , as he had formerly been taught to do .
His father , fortunately , was within hearing , and poor Brian ran with the greatest joy to open the window and to let him in .
`` O , father , here 's my white pigeon come back of his own accord , '' exclaimed Brian ; `` I must run and show him to my mother . ''
At this instant the pigeon spread his wings , and Brian discovered under one of its wings a small and very dirty looking billet .
He opened it in his father's presence .
The scrawl was scarcely legible ; but these words were at length deciphered : -- '' Thare are eight of uz sworn ; I send yo at botom thare names .
We meat at tin this nite at my faders , and have harms and all in radiness to brak into the grate 'ouse .
Mr .
Summervill is to lye out to nite -- kip the pigeon untill to-morrow .
For ever yours , MURTAGH COX , JUN . ''
Scarcely had they finished reading this note , than both father and son exclaimed , `` Let us go and show it to Mr .
Somerville . ''
Before they set out , they had , however , the prudence to secure the pigeon , so that he should not be seen by anyone but themselves .
Mr .
Somerville , in consequence of this fortunate discovery , took proper measures for the apprehension of the eight men who had sworn to rob his house .
When they were all safely lodged in the county gaol , he sent for Brian O'Neill and his father ; and after thanking them for the service they had done him , he counted out ten bright guineas upon a table , and pushed them towards Brian , saying , `` I suppose you know that a reward of ten guineas was offered some weeks ago for the discovery of John Mac Dermod , one of the eight men whom we have just taken up ? ''
`` No , sir , '' said Brian ; `` I did not know it , and I did not bring that note to you to get ten guineas , but because I thought it was right .
I don't want to be paid for doing it . ''
`` That 's my own boy , '' said his father .
`` We thank you , sir ; but we 'll not take the money ; I DO N'T LIKE TO TAKE THE PRICE OF BLOOD . ''
`` I know the difference , my good friends , '' said Mr .
Somerville , `` between vile informers and courageous , honest men . ''
`` Why , as to that , please your honour , though we are poor , I hope we are honest . ''
`` And , what is more , '' said Mr .
Somerville , `` I have a notion that you would continue to be honest , even if you were rich .
Will you , my good lad , '' continued Mr .
Somerville , after a moment 's pause -- '' will you trust me with your pigeon a few days ? ''
`` O , and welcome , sir , '' said the boy , with a smile ; and he brought the pigeon to Mr .
Somerville when it was dark , and nobody saw him .
A few days afterwards , Mr .
Somerville called at O'Neill 's house , and bid him and his son follow him .
They followed till he stopped opposite to the bow-window of the new inn .
The carpenter had just put up a sign , which was covered over with a bit of carpeting .
`` Go up the ladder , will you ? ''
said Mr .
Somerville to Brian , `` and pull that sign straight , for it hangs quite crooked .
There , now it is straight .
Now pull off the carpet , and let us see the new sign . ''
The boy pulled off the cover , and saw a white pigeon painted upon the sign , and the name of O'Neill in large letters underneath .
`` Take care you do not tumble down and break your neck upon this joyful occasion , '' said Mr .
Somerville , who saw that Brian 's surprise was too great for his situation .
`` Come down from the ladder , and wish your father joy of being master of the new inn called the 'White Pigeon . '
And I wish him joy of having such a son as you are .
Those who bring up their children well , will certainly be rewarded for it , be they poor or rich . ''
THE BIRTHDAY PRESENT .
`` Mamma , '' said Rosamond , after a long silence , `` do you know what I have been thinking of all this time ? ''
`` No , my dear. -- What ? ''
`` Why , mamma , about my cousin Bell 's birthday ; do you know what day it is ? ''
`` No , I do n't remember . ''
`` Dear mother !
do n't you remember it 's the 22nd of December ; and her birthday is the day after to-morrow ?
Do n't you recollect now ?
But you never remember about birthdays , mamma .
That was just what I was thinking of , that you never remember my sister Laura 's birthday , or-or-or MINE , mamma . ''
`` What do you mean my dear ?
I remember your birthday perfectly well . ''
`` Indeed !
but you never KEEP it , though . ''
`` What do you mean by keeping your birthday ? ''
`` Oh , mamma , you know very well -- as Bell 's birthday is kept .
In the first place , there is a great dinner . ''
`` And can Bell eat more upon her birthday than upon any other day ? ''
`` No ; nor I should not mind about the dinner , except the mince-pies .
But Bell has a great many nice things -- I do n't mean nice eatable things , but nice new playthings , given to her always on her birthday ; and everybody drinks her health , and she 's so happy . ''
`` But stay , Rosamond , how you jumble things together !
Is it everybody's drinking her health that makes her so happy ?
or the new playthings , or the nice mince pies ?
I can easily believe that she is happy whilst she is eating a mince pie , or whilst she is playing ; but how does everybody's drinking her health at dinner make her happy ? ''
Rosamond paused , and then said she did not know .
`` But , '' added she , `` the NICE NEW playthings , mother ! ''
`` But why the nice new playthings ?
Do you like them only because they are NEW ? ''
`` Not ONLY -- _I_ do not like playthings ONLY because they are new ; but Bell DOES , I believe -- for that puts me in mind -- Do you know , mother , she had a great drawer full of OLD playthings that she never used , and she said that they were good for nothing , because they were OLD ; but I thought many of them were good for a great deal more than the new ones .
Now you shall be judge , mamma ; I 'll tell you all that was in the drawer . ''
`` Nay , Rosamond , thank you , not just now ; I have not time to listen to you . ''
`` Well then , mamma , the day after to-morrow I can show you the drawer .
I want you to judge very much , because I am sure I was in the right .
And , mother , '' added Rosamond , stopping her as she was going out of the room , '' will you -- not now , but when you 've time -- will you tell me why you never keep my birthday -- why you never make any difference between that day and any other day ? ''
`` And will you , Rosamond -- not now , but when you have time to think about it -- tell me why I should make any difference between your birthday and any other day ? ''
Rosamond thought , but she could not find out any reason ; besides , she suddenly recollected that she had not time to think any longer ; for there was a certain work-basket to be finished , which she was making for her cousin Bell , as a present upon her birthday .
The work was at a stand for want of some filigree-paper , and , as her mother was going out , she asked her to take her with her , that she might buy some .
Her sister Laura went with them .
`` Sister , '' said Rosamond , as they were walking along , `` what have you done with your half-guinea ? ''
`` I have it in my pocket . ''
`` Dear !
you will keep it for ever in your pocket .
You know , my godmother when she gave it to you , said you would keep it longer than I should keep mine ; and I know what she thought by her look at the time .
I heard her say something to my mother . ''
`` Yes , '' said Laura , smiling ; `` she whispered so loud that I could not help hearing her too .
She said I was a little miser . ''
`` But did not you hear her say that I was very GENEROUS ?
and she 'll see that she was not mistaken .
I hope she 'll be by when I give my basket to Bell -- wo n't it be beautiful ?
There is to be a wreath of myrtle , you know , round the handle , and a frost ground , and then the medallions -- '' '' Stay , '' interrupted her sister , for Rosamond , anticipating the glories of her work-basket , talked and walked so fast that she had passed , without perceiving it , the shop where the filigree-paper was to be bought .
They turned back .
Now it happened that the shop was the corner house of a street , and one of the windows looked out into a narrow lane .
A coach full of ladies stopped at the door , just before they went in , so that no one had time immediately to think of Rosamond and her filigree-paper , and she went to the window where she saw her sister Laura looking earnestly at something that was passing in the lane .
Opposite to the window , at the door of a poor-looking house , there was sitting a little girl weaving lace .
Her bobbins moved as quick as lightning , and she never once looked up from her work .
`` Is not she very industrious ? ''
said Laura ; `` and very honest , too ? ''
added she in a minute afterwards ; for just then a baker with a basket of rolls on his head passed , and by accident one of the rolls fell close to the little girl .
She took it up eagerly , looked at it as if she was very hungry , then put aside her work , and ran after the baker to return it to him .
Whilst she was gone , a footman in a livery , laced with silver , who belonged to the coach that stood at the shop door , as he was lounging with one of his companions , chanced to spy the weaving pillow , which she had left upon a stone before the door .
To divert himself ( for idle people do mischief often to divert themselves ) he took up the pillow , and entangled all the bobbins .
The little girl came back out of breath to her work ; but what was her surprise and sorrow to find it spoiled .
She twisted and untwisted , placed and replaced , the bobbins , while the footman stood laughing at her distress .
She got up gently , and was retiring into the house , when the silver laced footman stopped her , saying , insolently , '' Sit still , child . ''
`` I must go to my mother , sir , '' said the child ; `` besides , you have spoiled all my lace .
I ca n't stay . ''
`` Ca n't you ? ''
said the brutal footman , snatching her weaving-pillow again , '' I 'll teach you to complain of me . ''
And he broke off , one after another , all the bobbins , put them into his pocket , rolled her weaving-pillow down the dirty lane , then jumped up behind his mistress ' coach , and was out of sight in an instant .
`` Poor girl ! ''
exclaimed Rosamond , no longer able to restrain her indignation at this injustice ; `` poor little girl ! ''
At this instant her mother said to Rosamond -- '' Come , now , my dear , if you want this filigree paper , buy it . ''
`` Yes , madam , '' said Rosamond ; and the idea of what her godmother and her cousin Bell would think of her generosity rushed again upon her imagination .
All her feelings of pity were immediately suppressed .
Satisfied with bestowing another exclamation upon the `` Poor little girl ! ''
she went to spend her half-guinea upon her filigree basket .
In the meantime , she that was called the `` little miser '' beckoned to the poor girl , and , opening the window , said , pointing to the cushion , `` Is it quite spoiled ? ''
`` Quite !
quite spoiled !
and I ca n't , nor mother neither , buy another ; and I ca n't do anything else for my bread . ''
A few , but very few , tears fell as she said this .
`` How much would another cost ? ''
said Laura .
`` Oh , a great -- GREAT deal . ''
`` More than that ? ''
said Laura , holding up her half-guinea .
`` Oh , no . ''
`` Then you can buy another with that , '' said Laura , dropping the half- guinea into her hand ; and she shut the window before the child could find words to thank her , but not before she saw a look of joy and gratitude , which gave Laura more pleasure probably than all the praise which could have been bestowed upon her generosity .
Late on the morning of her cousin 's birthday , Rosamond finished her work- basket .
The carriage was at the door -- Laura came running to call her ; her father 's voice was heard at the same instant ; so she was obliged to go down with her basket but half wrapped up in silver paper -- a circumstance at which she was a good deal disconcerted ; for the pleasure of surprising Bell would be utterly lost if one bit of the filigree should peep out before the proper time .
As the carriage went on , Rosamond pulled the paper to one side and to the other , and by each of the four corners .
`` It will never do , my dear , '' said her father , who had been watching her operations .
`` I am afraid you will never make a sheet of paper cover a box which is twice as large as itself . ''
`` It is not a box , father , '' said Rosamond , a little peevishly ; `` it 's a basket . ''
`` Let us look at this basket , '' said he , taking it out of her unwilling hands , for she knew of what frail materials it was made , and she dreaded its coming to pieces under her father 's examination .
He took hold of the handle rather roughly ; when , starting off the coach seat , she cried , `` Oh , sir !
father !
sir !
you will spoil it indeed ! ''
said she , with increased vehemence , when , after drawing aside the veil of silver paper , she saw him grasp the myrtle wreathed handle .
`` Indeed , sir , you will spoil the poor handle . ''
`` But what is the use of THE POOR HANDLE , '' said her father , `` if we are not to take hold of it ?
And pray , '' continued he , turning the basket round with his finger and thumb , rather in a disrespectful manner , `` pray , is this the thing you have been about all this week ?
I have seen you all this week dabbling with paste and rags ; I could not conceive what you were about .
Is this the thing ? ''
`` Yes , sir .
You think , then , that I have wasted my time , because the basket is of no use ; but then it is a present for my Cousin Bell . ''
`` Your Cousin Bell will be very much obliged to you for a present that is of no use .
You had better have given her the purple jar . ''
`` Oh , father !
I thought you had forgotten that -- it was two years ago ; I'm not so silly now .
But Bell will like the basket , I know , though it is of no use . ''
`` Then you think Bell is sillier now than you were two years ago , -- well , perhaps that is true ; but how comes it , Rosamond , now that you are so wise , that you are fond of such a silly person ? ''
`` _I_ , father ? ''
said Rosamond , hesitating , `` I do n't think I am VERY fond of her . ''
`` I did not say VERY fond . ''
`` Well , but I do n't think I am at all fond of her . ''
`` But you have spent a whole week in making this thing for her . ''
`` Yes , and all my half guinea besides . ''
`` Yet you think her silly , and you are not fond of her at all ; and you say you know this thing will be of no use to her . ''
`` But it is her birthday , sir ; and I am sure she will EXPECT something , and everybody else will give her something . ''
`` Then your reason for giving is because she expects you to give her something .
And will you , or can you , or should you , always give , merely because others EXPECT , or because somebody else gives ? ''
`` Always ? -- no , not always . ''
`` Oh , only on birthdays . ''
Rosamond , laughing : `` Now you are making a joke of me , papa , I see ; but I thought you liked that people should be generous , -- my godmother said that she did . ''
`` So do I , full as well as your godmother ; but we have not yet quite settled what it is to be generous . ''
`` Why is it not generous to make presents ? ''
said Rosamond .
`` That is the question which it would take up a great deal of time to answer .
But , for instance , to make a present of a thing that you know can be of no use to a person you neither love nor esteem , because it is her birthday , and because everybody gives her something , and because she expects something , and because your godmother says she likes that people should be generous , seems to me , my dear Rosamond , to be , since I must say it , rather more like folly than generosity . ''
Rosamond looked down upon the basket , and was silent .
`` Then I am a fool , am I ? ''
said she looking up at last .
`` Because you have made ONE mistake ?
No .
If you have sense enough to see your own mistakes , and can afterwards avoid them , you will never be a fool . ''
Here the carriage stopped , and Rosamond recollected that the basket was uncovered .
Now we must observe , that Rosamond 's father had not been too severe upon Bell when he called her a silly girl .
From her infancy she had been humoured ; and at eight years old she had the misfortune to be a spoiled child .
She was idle , fretful , and selfish ; so that nothing could make her happy .
On her birthday she expected , however , to be perfectly happy .
Everybody in the house tried to please her , and they succeeded so well , that between breakfast and dinner she had only six fits of crying .
The cause of five of these fits no one could discover : but the last , and most lamentable , was occasioned by a disappointment about a worked muslin frock ; and accordingly , at dressing time , her maid brought it to her , exclaiming , `` See here , miss , what your mamma has sent you on your birthday .
Here 's a frock fit for a queen -- if it had but lace round the cuffs . ''
`` And why has not it lace around the cuffs ?
mamma said it should . ''
`` Yes , but mistress was disappointed about the lace ; it is not come home . ''
`` Not come home , indeed !
and did n't they know it was my birthday ?
But then I say I wo n't wear it without the lace -- I ca n't wear it without the lace , and I wo n't . ''
The lace , however , could not be had ; and Bell at length submitted to let the frock be put on .
`` Come , Miss Bell , dry your eyes , '' said the maid who educated her ; `` dry your eyes , and I 'll tell you something that will please you . ''
`` What , then ? ''
said the child , pouting and sobbing .
`` Why -- but you must not tell that I told you . ''
`` No , -- but if I am asked ? ''
`` Why , if you are asked , you must tell the truth , to be sure .
So I'll hold my tongue , miss . ''
`` Nay , tell me , though , and I 'll never tell -- if I AM asked . ''
`` Well , then , '' said the maid , `` your cousin Rosamond is come , and has brought you the most BEAUTIFULLEST thing you ever saw in your life ; but you are not to know anything about it till after dinner , because she wants to surprise you ; and mistress has put it into her wardrobe till after dinner . ''
`` Till after dinner ! ''
repeated Bell , impatiently ; `` I ca n't wait till then ; I must see it this minute . ''
The maid refused her several times , till Bell burst into another fit of crying , and the maid , fearing that her mistress would be angry with HER , if Bell 's eyes were red at dinner time , consented to show her the basket .
`` How pretty ! -- but let me have it in my own hands , '' said Bell , as the maid held the basket up out of her reach .
`` Oh , no , you must not touch it ; for if you should spoil it , what would become of me ? ''
`` Become of you , indeed ! ''
exclaimed the spoiled child , who never considered anything but her own immediate gratification -- '' Become of YOU , indeed !
what signifies that -- I sha'n't spoil it ; and I will have it in my own hands .
If you do n't hold it down for me directly , I 'll tell that you showed it to me . ''
`` Then you wo n't snatch it ? ''
`` No , no , I wo n't indeed , '' said Bell ; but she had learned from her maid a total disregard of truth .
She snatched the basket the moment it was within her reach .
A struggle ensued , in which the handle and lid were torn off , and one of the medallions crushed inwards , before the little fury returned to her senses .
Calmed at this sight , the next question was , how she should conceal the mischief which she had done .
After many attempts , the handle and lid were replaced ; the basket was put exactly in the same spot in which it had stood before , and the maid charged the child , `` TO LOOK AS IF NOTHING WAS THE MATTER . ''
We hope that both children and parents will here pause for a moment to reflect .
The habits of tyranny , meanness , and falsehood , which children acquire from living with bad servants , are scarcely ever conquered in the whole course of their future lives .
After shutting up the basket they left the room , and in the adjoining passage they found a poor girl waiting with a small parcel in her hand .
`` What 's your business ? ''
said the maid .
`` I have brought home the lace , madam , that was bespoke for the young lady . ''
`` Oh , you have , have you , at last ? ''
said Bell ; `` and pray why did n't you bring it sooner ? ''
The girl was going to answer , but the maid interrupted her , saying -- '' Come , come , none of your excuses ; you are a little idle , good-for-nothing thing , to disappoint Miss Bell upon her birthday .
But now you have brought it , let us look at it ! ''
The little girl gave the lace without reply , and the maid desired her to go about her business , and not to expect to be paid ; for that her mistress could not see anybody , BECAUSE she was in a room full of company .
`` May I call again , madam , this afternoon ? ''
said the child , timidly .
`` Lord bless my stars ! ''
replied the maid , `` what makes people so poor , I WONDERS !
I wish mistress would buy her lace at the warehouse , as I told her , and not of these folks .
Call again !
yes , to be sure .
I believe you 'd call , call , call twenty times for twopence . ''
However ungraciously the permission to call again was granted , it was received with gratitude .
The little girl departed with a cheerful countenance ; and Bell teazed her maid till she got her to sew the long wished-for lace upon her cuffs .
Unfortunate Bell ! -- All dinner time passed , and people were so hungry , so busy , or so stupid , that not an eye observed her favourite piece of finery .
Till at length she was no longer able to conceal her impatience , and turning to Laura , who sat next to her , she said , `` You have no lace upon your cuffs .
Look how beautiful mine is ! -- is not it ?
Do n't you wish your mamma could afford to give some like it ?
But you ca n't get any if she would , for this was made on purpose for me on my birthday , and nobody can get a bit more anywhere , if they would give the world for it . ''
`` But can not the person who made it , '' said Laura , `` make any more like it ? ''
`` No , no , no ! ''
cried Bell ; for she had already learned , either from her maid or her mother , the mean pride which values things not for being really pretty or useful , but for being such as nobody else can procure .
`` Nobody can get any like it , I say , '' repeated Bell ; `` nobody in all London can make it but one person , and that person will never make a bit for anybody but me , I am sure .
Mamma wo n't let her , if I ask her not . ''
`` Very well , '' said Laura , coolly , `` I do not want any of it ; you need not be so violent : I assure you that I do n't want any of it . ''
`` Yes , but you do , though , '' said Bell , more angrily .
`` No , indeed , '' said Laura , smiling .
`` You do , in the bottom of your heart ; but you say you do n't to plague me , I know , '' cried Bell , swelling with disappointed vanity .
`` It is pretty for all that , and it cost a great deal of money too , and nobody shall have any like it , if they cried their eyes out . ''
Laura received this declaration in silence -- Rosamond smiled ; and at her smile the ill-suppressed rage of the spoiled child burst forth into the seventh and loudest fit of crying which had yet been heard on her birthday .
`` What 's the matter , my pet ? ''
cried her mother ; `` come to me , and tell me what 's the matter . ''
Bell ran roaring to her mother ; but no otherwise explained the cause of her sorrow than by tearing the fine lace with frantic gestures from her cuffs , and throwing the fragments into her mother 's lap .
`` Oh !
the lace , child ! -- are you mad ? ''
said her mother , catching hold of both her hands .
`` Your beautiful lace , my dear love -- do you know how much it cost ? ''
`` I do n't care how much it cost -- it is not beautiful , and I 'll have none of it , '' replied Bell , sobbing ; `` for it is not beautiful . ''
`` But it is beautiful , '' retorted her mother ; `` I chose the pattern myself .
Who has put it into your head , child , to dislike it ?
Was it Nancy ? ''
`` No , not Nancy , but THEM , mamma , '' said Bell , pointing to Laura and Rosamond .
`` Oh , fie !
do n't POINT , '' said her mother , putting down her stubborn finger ; `` nor say THEM , like Nancy ; I am sure you misunderstood .
Miss Laura , I am sure , did not mean any such thing . ''
`` No , madam ; and I did not say any such thing , that I recollect , '' said Laura , gently .
`` Oh , no , indeed ! ''
cried Rosamond , warmly , rising in her sister 's defence .
No defence or explanation , however , was to be heard , for everybody had now gathered round Bell , to dry her tears , and to comfort her for the mischief she had done to her own cuffs .
They succeeded so well , that in about a quarter of an hour the young lady 's eyes , and the reddened arches over her eyebrows came to their natural colour ; and the business being thus happily hushed up , the mother , as a reward to her daughter for her good humour , begged that Rosamond would now be so good as to produce her '' charming present . ''
Rosamond , followed by all the company , amongst whom , to her great joy , was her godmother , proceeded to the dressing room .
`` Now I am sure , '' thought she , `` Bell will be surprised , and my godmother will see she was right about my generosity . ''
The doors of the wardrobe were opened with due ceremony , and the filigree basket appeared in all its glory .
`` Well , this is a charming present , indeed ! ''
said the godmother , who was one of the company ; `` MY Rosamond knows how to make presents . ''
And as she spoke , she took hold of the basket , to lift it down to the admiring audience .
Scarcely had she touched it , when , lo !
the basket fell to the ground , and only the handle remained in her hand .
All eyes were fixed upon the wreck .
Exclamations of sorrow were heard in various tones ; and `` Who can have done this ? ''
was all that Rosamond could say .
Bell stood in sullen silence , which she obstinately preserved in the midst of the inquiries that were made about the disaster .
At length the servants were summoned , and amongst them , Nancy , Miss Bell 's maid and governess .
She affected much surprise when she saw what had befallen the basket , and declared that she knew nothing of the matter , but that she had seen her mistress in the morning put it quite safe into the wardrobe ; and that , for her part , she had never touched it , or thought of touching it , in her born days .
`` Nor Miss Bell , neither , ma'am , -- I can answer for her ; for she never knew of its being there , because I never so much as mentioned it to her , that there was such a thing in the house , because I knew Miss Rosamond wanted to surprise her with the secret ; so I never mentioned a sentence of it -- did I , Miss Bell ? ''
Bell , putting on the deceitful look which her maid had taught her , answered boldly , `` NO ; '' but she had hold of Rosamond 's hand , and at the instant she uttered this falsehood she squeezed it terribly .
`` Why do you squeeze my hand so ? ''
said Rosamond , in a low voice ; `` what are you afraid of ? ''
`` Afraid of ! ''
cried Bell , turning angrily ; `` I 'm not afraid of anything , -- I 've nothing to be afraid about . ''
`` Nay , I did not say you had , '' whispered Rosamond ; `` but only if you did by accident -- you know what I mean -- I should not be angry if you did -- only say so . ''
`` I say I did not ! ''
cried Bell , furiously ; `` Mamma , mamma !
Nancy !
my cousin Rosamond wo n't believe me !
That 's very hard .
It 's very rude , and I wo n't bear it -- I wo n't . ''
`` Do n't be angry , love .
Do n't , '' said the maid .
`` Nobody suspects you , darling , '' said her mother ; `` but she has too much sensibility .
Do n't cry , love ; nobody suspected you .
But you know , '' continued she , turning to the maid , `` somebody must have done this , and I must know how it was done .
Miss Rosamond 's charming present must not be spoiled in this way , in my house , without my taking proper notice of it .
I assure you I am very angry about it , Rosamond . ''
Rosamond did not rejoice in her anger , and had nearly made a sad mistake by speaking aloud her thoughts -- '' I WAS VERY FOOLISH -- '' she began and stopped .
`` Ma'am , '' cried the maid , suddenly , `` I 'll venture to say I know who did it . ''
`` Who ? ''
said everyone , eagerly .
`` Who ? ''
said Bell , trembling . ''
`` Why , miss , do n't you recollect that little girl with the lace , that we saw peeping about in the passage ?
I 'm sure she must have done it ; for here she was by herself half an hour or more , and not another creature has been in mistress ' dressing-room , to my certain knowledge , since morning .
Those sort of people have so much curiosity .
I 'm sure she must have been meddling with it , '' added the maid .
`` Oh , yes , that 's the thing , '' said the mistress , decidedly .
`` Well , Miss Rosamond , for your comfort she shall never come into my house again . ''
`` Oh , that would not comfort me at all , '' said Rosamond ; `` besides , we are not sure that she did it , and if -- '' A single knock at the door was heard at this instant .
It was the little girl , who came to be paid for her lace .
`` Call her in , '' said the lady of the house ; `` let us see her directly . ''
The maid , who was afraid that the girl 's innocence would appear if she were produced , hesitated ; but upon her mistress repeating her commands , she was forced to obey .
The girl came in with a look of simplicity ; but when she saw a room full of company she was a little abashed .
Rosamond and Laura looked at her and one another with surprise , for it was the same little girl whom they had seen weaving lace .
`` Is not it she ? ''
whispered Rosamond to her sister .
`` Yes , it is ; but hush , '' said Laura , `` she does not know us .
Do n't say a word , let us hear what she will say . ''
Laura got behind the rest of the company as she spoke , so that the little girl could not see her .
`` Vastly well ! ''
said Bell 's mother ; `` I am waiting to see how long you will have the assurance to stand there with that innocent look .
Did you ever see that basket before ? ''
`` Yes , ma'am , '' said the girl .
`` YES , MA'AM ! ''
cried the maid ; `` and what else do you know about it ?
You had better confess it at once , and mistress , perhaps , will say no more about it . ''
`` Yes , do confess it , '' added Bell , earnestly .
`` Confess what , madam ? ''
said the little girl ; `` I never touched the basket , madam . ''
`` You never TOUCHED it ; but you confess , '' interrupted Bell 's mother , `` that you DID SEE it before .
And , pray , how came you to see it ?
You must have opened my wardrobe . ''
`` No , indeed , ma'am , '' said the little girl ; `` but I was waiting in the passage , ma'am , and this door was partly open ; and looking at the maid , you know , I could not help seeing it . ''
`` Why , how could you see through the doors of my wardrobe ? ''
rejoined the lady .
The maid , frightened , pulled the little girl by the sleeve .
`` Answer me , '' said the lady , `` where did you see this basket ? ''
Another stronger pull .
`` I saw it , madam , in her hands , '' looking at the maid ; `` and -- '' '' Well , and what became of it afterwards ? ''
`` Ma'am '' -- hesitating -- '' miss pulled , and by accident -- I believe , I saw , ma'am -- miss , you know what I saw . ''
`` I do not know -- I do not know ; and if I did , you had no business there ; and mamma wo n't believe you , I am sure . ''
Everybody else , however , did believe ; and their eyes were fixed upon Bell in a manner which made her feel rather ashamed .
`` What do you all look at me so for ?
Why do you all look so ?
And am I to be put to shame on my birthday ? ''
cried she , bursting into a roar of passion ; `` and all for this nasty thing ! ''
added she , pushing away the remains of the basket , and looking angrily at Rosamond .
`` Bell !
Bell !
O , fie !
fie ! -- Now I am ashamed of you ; that 's quite rude to your cousin , '' said her mother , who was more shocked at her daughter's want of politeness than at her falsehood .
`` Take her away , Nancy , till she has done crying , '' added she to the maid , who accordingly carried off her pupil .
Rosamond , during this scene , especially at the moment when her present was pushed away with such disdain , had been making reflections upon the nature of true generosity .
A smile from her father , who stood by , a silent spectator of the catastrophe of the filigree basket , gave rise to these reflections ; nor were they entirely dissipated by the condolence of the rest of the company , nor even by the praises of her godmother , who , for the purpose of condoling with her , said , `` Well , my dear Rosamond , I admire your generous spirit .
You know I prophesied that your half-guinea would be gone the soonest .
Did I not , Laura ? ''
said she , appealing , in a sarcastic tone , to where she thought Laura was .
`` Where is Laura ?
I do n't see her . ''
Laura came forward .
`` You are too PRUDENT to throw away your money like your sister .
Your half-guinea , I 'll answer for it , is snug in your pocket -- Is it not ? ''
`` No , madam , '' answered she , in a low voice .
But low as the voice of Laura was , the poor little lace-girl heard it ; and now , for the first time , fixing her eyes upon Laura , recollected her benefactress .
`` Oh , that 's the young lady ! ''
she exclaimed , in a tone of joyful gratitude , `` the good , good young lady , who gave me the half- guinea , and would not stay to be thanked for it ; but I WILL thank her now . ''
`` The half-guinea , Laura ! ''
said her godmother .
`` What is all this ? ''
`` I 'll tell you , madam , if you please , '' said the little girl .
It was not in expectation of being praised for it , that Laura had been generous , and therefore everybody was really touched with the history of the weaving-pillow ; and whilst they praised , felt a certain degree of respect , which is not always felt by those who pour forth eulogiums .
RESPECT is not an improper word , even applied to a child of Laura 's age ; for let the age or situation of the person be what it may , they command respect who deserve it .
`` Ah , madam ! ''
said Rosamond to her godmother , `` now you see -- you see she is NOT a little miser .
I 'm sure that 's better than wasting half a guinea upon a filigree basket ; is it not , ma'am ? ''
said she , with an eagerness which showed that she had forgotten all her own misfortunes in sympathy with her sister .
`` This is being REALLY GENEROUS , father , is it not ? ''
`` Yes , Rosamond , '' said her father , and he kissed her ; `` this IS being really generous .
It is not only by giving away money that we can show generosity ; it is by giving up to others anything that we like ourselves : and therefore , '' added he , smiling , `` it is really generous of you to give your sister the thing you like best of all others . ''
`` The thing I like the best of all others , father , '' said Rosamond , half pleased , half vexed .
`` What is that , I wonder ?
You do n't mean PRAISE , do you , sir ? ''
`` Nay , you must decide that yourself , Rosamond . ''
`` Why , sir , '' said she , ingenuously , `` perhaps it WAS ONCE the thing I liked best ; but the pleasure I have just felt makes me like something else much better . ''
ETON MONTEM .
[ Extracted from the `` Courier '' of May , 1799 . ]
`` Yesterday this triennial ceremony took place , with which the public are too well acquainted to require a particular description .
A collection , called Salt , is taken from the public , which forms a purse , to support the Captain of the School in his studies at Cambridge .
This collection is made by the Scholars , dressed in fancy dresses , all round the country .
`` At eleven o'clock , the youths being assembled in their habiliments at the College , the Royal Family set off from the Castle to see them , and , after walking round the Courtyard , they proceeded to Salt Hill in the following order : -- '' His Majesty , his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales , and the Earl of Uxbridge .
`` Their Royal Highnesses the Dukes of Kent and Cumberland , Earl Morton , and General Gwynne , all on horseback , dressed in the Windsor uniform , except the Prince of Wales , who wore a suit of dark blue , and a brown surtout over .
`` Then followed the Scholars , preceded by the Marechal Serjeant , the Musicians of the Staffordshire Band , and Mr .
Ford , Captain of the Seminary , the Serjeant Major , Serjeants , Colonels , Corporals , Musicians , Ensign , Lieutenant , Steward , Salt Bearers , Polemen , and Runners .
`` The cavalcade was brought up by her Majesty and her amiable daughters in two carriages , and a numerous company of equestrians and pedestrians , all eager to behold their Sovereign and his family .
Among the former , Lady Lade was foremost in the throng ; only two others dared venture their persons on horseback in such a multitude .
`` The King and Royal Family were stopped on Eton Bridge by Messrs .
Young and Mansfield , the Salt Bearers , to whom their Majesties delivered their customary donation of fifty guineas each .
`` At Salt Hill , his Majesty , with his usual affability , took upon himself to arrange the procession round the Royal carriages ; and even when the horses were taken off , with the assistance of the Duke of Kent , fastened the traces round the pole of the coaches , to prevent any inconvenience .
`` An exceeding heavy shower of rain coming on , the Prince took leave , and went to the 'Windmill Inn , ' till it subsided .
The King and his attendants weathered it out in their great-coats .
`` After the young gentlemen walked round the carriage , Ensign Vince and the Salt Bearers proceeded to the summit of the hill ; but the wind being boisterous , he could not exhibit his dexterity in displaying his flag , and the space being too small before the carriages , from the concourse of spectators , the King kindly acquiesced in not having it displayed under such inconvenience .
`` Their Majesties and the Princesses then returned home , the King occasionally stopping to converse with the Dean of Windsor , the Earl of Harrington , and other noblemen .
`` The Scholars partook of an elegant dinner at the 'Windmill Inn , ' and in the evening walked on Windsor Terrace .
`` Their Royal Highnesses the Prince of Wales and Duke of Cumberland , after taking leave of their Majesties , set off for town , and honoured the Opera House with their presence in the evening .
`` The profit arising from the Salt collected , according to account , amounted to 8OO pounds .
`` The Stadtholder , the Duke of Gordon , Lord and Lady Melbourne , Viscount Brome , and a numerous train of fashionable nobility , were present .
`` The following is an account of their dresses , made as usual , very handsomely , by Mrs .
Snow , milliner , of Windsor : -- '' Mr .
Ford , Captain , with eight Gentlemen to attend him as servitors .
`` Mr .
Sarjeant , Marechal .
`` Mr .
Bradith , Colonel .
`` Mr .
Plumtree , Lieutenant .
`` Mr .
Vince , Ensign .
`` Mr .
Young , College Salt Bearer ; white and gold dress , rich satin bag , covered with gold netting .
`` Mr .
Mansfield , Oppidan , white , purple , and orange dress , trimmed with silver ; rich satin bag , purple and silver : each carrying elegant poles , with gold and silver cord .
`` Mr .
Keity , yellow and black velvet ; helmet trimmed with silver .
`` Mr .
Bartelot , plain mantle and sandals , Scotch bonnet , a very Douglas .
`` Mr .
Knapp , flesh-colour and blue ; Spanish hat and feathers .
`` Mr .
Ripley , rose-colour ; helmet .
`` Mr .
Islip ( being in mourning ) , a scarf ; helmet , black velvet ; and white satin .
`` Mr .
Tomkins , violet and silver ; helmet .
`` Mr .
Thackery , lilac and silver ; Roman Cap .
`` Mr .
Drury , mazarin blue ; fancy cap .
`` Mr .
Davis , slate-colour and straw .
`` Mr .
Routh , pink and silver , Spanish hat .
`` Mr .
Curtis , purple , fancy cap .
`` Mr .
Lloyd , blue ; ditto .
`` At the conclusion of the ceremony the Royal Family returned to Windsor , and the boys were all sumptuously entertained at the tavern at Salt Hill .
About six in the evening all the boys returned in the order of procession , and , marching round the great square of Eton , were dismissed .
The captain then paid his respects to the Royal Family , at the Queen's Lodge , Windsor , previously to his departure for King 's College , Cambridge , to defray which expense the produce of the Montem was presented to him .
`` The day concluded by a brilliant promenade of beauty , rank , and fashion , on Windsor Terrace , enlivened by the performance of several bands of music .
`` The origin of the procession is from the custom by which the Manor was held .
`` The custom of hunting the Ram belonged to Eton College , as well as the custom of Salt ; but it was discontinued by Dr .
Cook , late Dean of Ely .
Now this custom we know to have been entered on the register of the Royal Abbey of Bec , in Normandy , as one belonging to the Manor of East or Great Wrotham , in Norfolk , given by Ralph de Toni to the Abbey of Bec , and was as follows : -- When the harvest was finished the tenants were to have half an acre of barley , and a ram let loose ; and if they caught him he was their own to make merry with ; but if he escaped from them he was the Lord 's .
The Etonians , in order to secure the ram , houghed him in the Irish fashion , and then attacked him with great clubs .
The cruelty of this proceeding brought it into disuse , and now it exists no longer. -- See Register of the Royal Abbey of Bec , folio 58 .
`` After the dissolution of the alien priories , in 1414 , by the Parliament of Leicester , they remained in the Crown till Henry VI. , who gave Wrotham Manor to Eton College ; and if the Eton Fellows would search , they would perhaps find the Manor in their possession , that was held by the custom of Salt . ''
MEN .
Alderman Bursal , Father of young Bursal .
Lord John , ) Talbot , ) Wheeler , ) Young Gentlemen of Eton , from 17 to 19 years of age .
Bursal , ) Rory O'Ryan ) Mr .
Newington , Landlord of the Inn at Salt Hill .
Farmer Hearty .
A Waiter and crowd of Eton Lads .
WOMEN .
The Marchioness of Piercefield , Mother of Lord John .
Lady Violetta -- her Daughter , a Child of six or seven years old .
Mrs .
Talbot .
Lousia Talbot , her Daughter .
Miss Bursal , Daughter to the Alderman .
Mrs .
Newington , Landlady of the Inn at Salt Hill .
Sally , a Chambermaid .
Patty , a Country Girl .
Pipe and Tabor , and Dance of Peasants .
SCENE I . The Bar of the `` Windmill Inn '' at Salt Hill .
MR .
and MRS .
NEWINGTON , the Landlord and Landlady .
Landlady .
'T is an unpossibility , Mr .
Newington ; and that 's enough .
Say no more about it ; 't is an unpossibility in the natur of things .
( She ranges jellies , etc. , in the Bar . )
And pray , do you take your great old fashioned tankard , Mr .
Newington , from among my jellies and confectioneries .
Landlord ( takes his tankard and drinks ) .
Anything for a quiet life .
If it is an impossibility , I 've no more to say ; only , for the soul of me , I ca n't see the great unpossibility , wife .
Landlady .
Wife , indeed ! -- wife ! -- wife !
wife every minute .
Landlord .
Heyday !
Why , what a plague would you have me call you ?
The other day you quarrelled with me for calling you Mrs .
Landlady .
Landlady .
To be sure I did , and very proper in me I should .
I 've turned off three waiters and five chambermaids already , for screaming after me Mrs .
Landlady !
Mrs .
Landlady !
But 't is all your ill manners .
Landlord .
Ill manners !
Why , if I may be so bold , if you are not Mrs .
Landlady , in the name of wonder what are you ?
Landlady .
Mrs .
Newington , Mr .
Newington .
Landlord ( drinks ) .
Mrs .
Newington , Mr .
Newington drinks your health ; for I suppose I must not be landlord any more in my own house ( shrugs ) .
Landlady .
Oh , as to that , I have no objections nor impediments to your being called LANDLORD .
You look it , and become it very proper .
Landlord .
Why , yes , indeed , thank my tankard , I do look it , and become it , and am nowise ashamed of it ; but everyone to their mind , as you , wife , do n't fancy the being called Mrs .
Landlady .
Landlady .
To be sure I do n't .
Why , when folks hear the old fashioned cry of Mrs .
Landlady !
Mrs .
Landlady !
who do they expect , think you , to see , but an overgrown , fat , featherbed of a woman , coming waddling along with her thumbs sticking on each side of her apron , o ' this fashion ?
Now , to see me coming , nobody would take me to be a landlady .
Landlord .
Very true , indeed , wife -- Mrs .
Newington , I mean -- I ask pardon ; but now to go on with what we were saying about the unpossibility of letting that old lady , and the civil-spoken young lady there above , have them there rooms for another day .
Landlady .
Now , Mr .
Newington , let me hear no more about that old gentlewoman , and that civil-spoken young lady .
Fair words cost nothing ; and I 've a notion that 's the cause they are so plenty with the young lady .
Neither o ' them , I take it , by what they 've ordered since their coming into the house , are such grand folk , that one need be so petticular about them .
Landlord .
Why , they came only in a chaise and pair , to be sure ; I can't deny that .
Landlady .
But , bless my stars !
what signifies talking ?
Do n't you know , as well as I do , Mr .
Newington , that to-morrow is Eton Montem , and that if we had twenty times as many rooms and as many more to the back of them , it would not be one too many for all the company we 've a right to expect , and those the highest quality of the land ?
Nay , what do I talk of to-morrow ?
is n't my Lady Piercefield and suite expected ?
and , moreover , Mr .
and Miss Bursal 's to be here , and will call for as much in an hour as your civil-spoken young lady in a twelvemonth , I reckon .
So , Mr .
Newington , if you do n't think proper to go up and inform the ladies above , that the Dolphin rooms are not for them , I must SPEAK myself , though 't is a thing I never do when I can help it .
Landlord ( aside ) .
She not like to speak !
( Aloud . )
My dear , you can speak a power better than I can ; so take it all upon yourself , if you please ; for , old-fashioned as I and my tankard here be , I ca n't make a speech that borders on the uncivil order , to a lady like , for the life and lungs of me .
So , in the name of goodness , do you go up , Mrs .
Newington .
Landlady .
And so I will , Mr .
Newington .
Help ye !
Civilities and rarities are out o ' season for them that ca n't pay for them in this world ; and very proper .
[ Exit Landlady . ]
Landlord .
And very proper !
Ha !
who comes yonder ?
The Eton chap who wheedled me into lending him my best hunter last year , and was the ruination of him ; but that must be paid for , wheedle or no wheedle ; and , for the matter of wheedling , I 'd stake this here Mr .
Wheeler , that is making up to me , do you see , against e'er a boy , or hobbledehoy , in all Eton , London , or Christendom , let the other be who he will .
Enter WHEELER .
Wheeler .
A fine day , Mr .
Newington .
Landlord .
A fine day , Mr .
Wheeler .
Wheel .
And I hope , for YOUR sake , we may have as fine a day for the Montem to-morrow .
It will be a pretty penny in your pocket !
Why , all the world will be here ; and ( looking round at the jellies , etc . )
so much the better for them ; for here are good things enough , and enough for them .
And here 's the best thing of all , the good old tankard still ; not empty , I hope .
Landlord .
Not empty , I hope .
Here 's to you , Mr .
Wheeler .
Wheel .
Mr .
Wheeler ! -- CAPTAIN Wheeler , if you please .
Landlord .
YOU , Captain Wheeler !
Why , I thought in former times it was always the oldest scholar at Eton that was Captain at the Montems ; and did n't Mr .
Talbot come afore you ?
Wheel .
Not at all ; we came on the same day .
Some say I came first ; some say Talbot .
So the choice of which of us is to be captain is to be put to the vote amongst the lads -- most votes carry it ; and I have most votes , I fancy ; so I shall be captain , to-morrow , and a pretty deal of salt * I reckon I shall pocket .
Why , the collection at the last Montem , they say , came to a plump thousand !
No bad thing for a young fellow to set out with for Oxford or Cambridge -- hey ?
* Salt , the cant name given by the Eton lads to the money collected at Montem .
Landlord .
And no bad thing , before he sets out for Cambridge or Oxford , 'twould be for a young gentleman to pay his debts .
Wheel .
Debts !
Oh , time enough for that .
I 've a little account with you in horses , I know ; but that 's between you and me , you know -- mum .
Landlord .
Mum me no mums , Mr .
Wheeler .
Between you and me , my best hunter has been ruinationed ; and I ca n't afford to be mum .
So you'll take no offence if I speak ; and as you 'll set off to-morrow , as soon as the Montem 's over , you 'll be pleased to settle with me some way or other to-day , as we 've no other time .
Wheel .
No time so proper , certainly .
Where 's the little account ? -- I have money sent me for my Montem dress , and I can squeeze that much out of it .
I came home from Eton on purpose to settle with you .
But as to the hunter , you must call upon Talbot -- do you understand ?
to pay for him ; for though Talbot and I had him the same day , 't was Talbot did for him , and Talbot must pay .
I spoke to him about it , and charged him to remember you ; for I never forget to speak a good word for my friends .
Landlord .
So I perceive .
Wheel .
I 'll make bold just to give you my opinion of these jellies whilst you are getting my account , Mr .
Newington .
( He swallows down a jelly or two -- Landlord is going . )
Enter TALBOT .
Talbot .
Hallo , Landlord !
where are making off so fast ?
Here , your jellies are all going as fast as yourself .
Wheel .
( aside ) .
Talbot ! -- I wish I was a hundred miles off .
Landlord .
You are heartily welcome , Mr .
Talbot .
A good morning to you , sir ; I 'm glad to see you -- very glad to see you , Mr .
Talbot .
Talb .
Then shake hands , my honest landlord .
( Talbot , in shaking hands with him , puts a purse into the landlord's hands . )
Landlord .
What 's here ?
Guineas ?
Talb .
The hunter , you know ; since Wheeler wo n't pay , I must -- that 's all .
Good morning .
Wheel .
( aside ) .
What a fool !
( Landlord , as Talbot is going , catches hold of his coat . )
Landlord .
Hold , Mr .
Talbot , this wo n't do !
Talb .
Wo n't it ?
Well , then , my watch must go .
Landlord .
Nay , nay !
but you are in such a hurry to pay -- you wo n't hear a man .
Half this is enough for your share o ' the mischief , in all conscience .
Mr .
Wheeler , there , had the horse on the same day .
Wheel .
But Bursal 's my witness -- Talb .
Oh , say no more about witnesses ; a man 's conscience is always his best witness , or his worst .
Landlord , take your money , and no more words .
Wheel .
This is very genteel of you , Talbot .
I always thought you would do the genteel thing as I knew you to be so generous and considerate .
Talb .
Do n't waste your fine speeches , Wheeler , I advise you , this election time .
Keep them for Bursal or Lord John , or some of those who like them .
They wo n't go down with me .
Good morning to you .
I give you notice , I 'm going back to Eton as fast as I can gallop ; and who knows what plain speaking may do with the Eton lads ?
I may be captain yet , Wheeler .
Have a care !
Is my horse ready there ?
Landlord .
Mr .
Talbot 's horse , there !
Mr .
Talbot 's horse , I say .
Talbot sings .
`` He carries weight -- he rides a race -- 'T is for a thousand pound ! ''
( Exit Talbot . )
Wheel .
And , dear me !
I shall be left behind .
A horse for me , pray ; a horse for Mr .
Wheeler !
( Exit Wheeler . )
Landlord ( calls very loud ) .
Mr .
Talbot 's horse !
Hang the hostler !
I'll saddle him myself .
( Exit Landlord . )
SCENE II .
A Dining room in the Inn at Salt Hill .
MRS .
TALBOT and LOUISA .
Louisa ( laughing ) .
With what an air Mrs .
Landlady made her exit !
Mrs .
Talbot .
When I was young , they say , I was proud ; but I am humble enough now : these petty mortifications do not vex me .
Louisa .
It is well my brother was gone before Mrs .
Landlady made her entree ; for if he had heard her rude speech , he would at least have given her the retort courteous .
Mrs .
Talb .
Now tell me honestly , my Louisa -- You were , a few days ago , at Bursal House .
Since you have left it and have felt something of the difference that is made in this world between splendour and no splendour , you have never regretted that you did not stay there , and that you did not bear more patiently with Miss Bursal 's little airs ?
Louisa .
Never for a moment .
At first Miss Bursal paid me a vast deal of attention ; but , for what reason I know not , she suddenly changed her manner , grew first strangely cold , then condescendingly familiar , and at last downright rude .
I could not guess the cause of these variations .
Mrs .
Talb .
( aside ) I guess the cause too well .
Louisa .
But as I perceived the lady was out of tune , I was in haste to leave her .
I should make a very bad , and , I am sure , a miserable toad eater .
I had much rather , if I were obliged to choose , earn my own bread , than live as toad eater with anybody .
Mrs .
Talb .
Fine talking , dear Louisa !
Louisa .
Do n't you believe me to be in earnest , mother !
To be sure , you can not know what I would do , unless I were put to the trial .
Mrs .
Talb .
Nor you either , my dear .
( She sighs , and is silent . )
Louisa ( takes her mother 's hand ) .
What is the matter , dear mother ?
You used to say , that seeing my brother always made you feel ten years younger ; yet even while he was here , you had , in spite of all your efforts to conceal them , those sudden fits of sadness .
Mrs .
Talb .
The Montem -- is not it to-morrow ?
Ay , but my boy is not sure of being captain .
Louisa .
No ; there is one Wheeler , who , as he says , is most likely to be chosen captain .
He has taken prodigious pains to flatter and win over many to his interest .
My brother does not so much care about it ; he is not avaricious .
Mrs .
Talb .
I love your generous spirit and his !
but , alas !
my dear , people may live to want , and wish for money , without being avaricious .
I would not say a word to Talbot ; full of spirits as he was this morning , I would not say a word to him , till after the Montem , of what has happened .
Louisa .
And what has happened , dear mother ?
Sit down , -- you tremble .
Mrs .
Talb .
( sits down and puts a letter into Louisa 's hand . )
Read that , love .
A messenger brought me that from town a few hours ago .
Louisa ( reads ) .
`` By an express from Portsmouth , we hear the Bombay Castle East Indiaman is lost , with all your fortune on board . ''
ALL !
I hope there is something left for you to live upon .
Mrs .
Talb .
About 15O pounds a year for us all .
Louisa .
That is enough , is it not , for YOU ?
Mrs .
Talb .
For me , love ?
I am an old woman , and want but little in this world , and shall be soon out of it .
Louisa ( kneels down beside her ) .
Do not speak so , dearest mother .
Mrs .
Talb .
Enough for me , love !
Yes , enough , and too much for me .
I am not thinking of myself .
Louisa .
Then , as to my brother , he has such abilities , and such industry , he will make a fortune at the bar for himself , most certainly .
Mrs .
Talb .
But his education is not completed .
How shall we provide him with money at Cambridge ?
Louisa .
This Montem .
The last time the captain had eight hundred , the time before a thousand , pounds .
Oh , I hope -- I fear !
Now , indeed , I know that , without being avaricious , we may want , and wish for money .
( Landlady 's voice heard behind the scenes . )
Landlady .
Waiter ! -- Miss Bursal 's curricle , and Mr .
Bursal 's vis-a-vis .
Run !
see that the Dolphin 's empty .
I say run ! -- run !
Mrs .
Talb .
I will rest for a few moments upon the sofa , in this bedchamber , before we set off .
Louisa ( goes to open the door ) .
They have bolted or locked it .
How unlucky !
( She turns the key , and tries to unlock the door . )
Enter WAITER .
Waiter .
Ladies , I 'm sorry -- Miss Bursal and Mr .
Bursal are come -- just coming upstairs .
Mrs .
Talb .
Then , will you be so good , sir , as to unlock this door ?
( Waiter tries to unlock the door . )
Waiter .
It must be bolted on the inside .
Chambermaid !
Sally !
Are you within there ?
Unbolt this door .
Mr .
Bursal 's voice behind the scenes .
Mr .
Burs .
Let me have a basin of good soup directly .
Waiter .
I 'll go round and have the door unbolted immediately , ladies .
( Exit Waiter . )
Enter MISS BURSAL , in a riding dress , and with a long whip .
Miss Bursal .
Those creatures , the ponies , have a'most pulled my 'and off .
Who 'ave we 'ere ?
Ha !
Mrs .
Talbot !
Louisa , 'ow are ye ?
I 'm so vastly glad to see you ; but I 'm so shocked to 'ear of the loss of the Bombay Castle .
Mrs .
Talbot , you look but poorly ; but this Montem will put everybody in spirits .
I 'ear everybody 's to be 'ere ; and my brother tells me , 'twill be the finest ever seen at HEton .
Louisa , my dear , I'm sorry I 've not a seat for you in my curricle for to-morrow ; but I've promised Lady Betty ; so , you know , 't is impossible for me .
Louisa .
Certainly ; and it would be impossible for me to leave my mother at present .
Chambermaid ( opens the bedchamber door ) .
The room 's ready now , ladies .
Mrs .
Talb .
Miss Bursal , we intrude upon you no longer .
Miss Burs .
Nay , why do you decamp , Mrs .
Talbot ?
I 'ad a thousand things to say to you , Louisa ; but am so tired and so annoyed -- ( Seats herself .
Exeunt Mrs .
Talbot , Louisa and Chambermaid . )
Enter MR .
BURSAL , with a basin of soup in his hand .
Mr .
Burs .
Well , thank my stars the Airly Castle is safe in the Downs .
Miss Burs .
Mr .
Bursal , can you inform me why Joe , my groom , does not make his appearance ?
Mr .
Burs .
( eating and speaking ) .
Yes , that I can , child ; because he is with his 'orses , where he ought to be .
'T is fit they should be looked after well ; for they cost me a pretty penny -- more than their heads are worth , and yours into the bargain ; but I was resolved , as we were to come to this Montem , to come in style .
Miss Burs .
In style , to be sure ; for all the world 's to be here -- the King , the Prince of WHales , and Duke o ' York , and all the first people ; and we shall cut a dash !
Dash !
dash !
will be the word to-morrow ! -- ( playing with her whip ) .
Mr .
Burs .
( aside ) .
Dash !
dash !
ay , just like her brother .
He 'll pay away finely , I warrant , by the time he 's her age .
Well , well , he can afford it ; and I do love to see my children make a figure for their money .
As Jack Bursal says , what 's money for , if it e'nt to make a figure .
( Aloud ) .
There 's your , brother Jack , now .
The extravagant dog !
he 'll have such a dress as never was seen , I suppose , at this here Montem .
Why , now , Jack Bursal spends more money at Eton , and has more to spend , than my Lord John , though my Lord John 's the son of a marchioness .
Miss Burs .
Oh , that makes no difference nowadays .
I wonder whether her ladyship is to be at this Montem .
The only good I ever got out of these stupid Talbots was an introduction to their friend Lady Piercefield .
What she could find to like in the Talbots , heaven knows .
I 've a notion she 'll drop them , when she hears of the loss of the Bombay Castle .
Enter a WAITER , with a note .
Waiter .
A note from my Lady Piercefield , sir .
Miss B . Charming woman !
Is she here , pray , sir ?
Waiter .
Just come .
Yes , ma'am .
( Exit Waiter . )
Miss B . Well , Mr .
Bursal , what is it ?
Mr .
B .
( reads ) .
`` Business of importance to communicate -- '' Hum !
what can it be ? -- ( going ) .
Miss B .
( aside ) .
Perhaps some match to propose for me !
( Aloud ) .
Mr .
Bursal , pray before you go to her ladyship , do send my OOMAN to me to make me presentable .
( Exit Miss Bursal at one door . )
Mr .
B .
( at the opposite door ) .
`` Business of importance ! ''
Hum !
I 'm glad I 'm prepared with a good basin of soup .
There 's no doing business well upon an empty stomach .
Perhaps the business is to lend cash ; and I 've no great stomach for that .
But it will be an honour , to be sure .
( Exit . )
SCENE III .
Landlady 's Parlour .
LANDLADY -- MR .
FINSBURY , a man-milliner , with bandboxes -- a fancy cap , or helmet , with feathers , in the Landlady 's hand -- a satin bag , covered with gold netting , in the man-milliner 's hand -- a mantle hanging over his arm .
A rough looking Farmer is sitting with his back towards them , eating bread and cheese , and reading a newspaper .
Landlady .
Well , this , to be sure , will be the best dressed Montem that ever was seen at Eton ; and you Lon'on gentlemen have the most fashionablest notions ; and this is the most elegantest fancy cap -- Finsbury .
Why , as you observe , ma 'm , that is the most elegant fancy cap of them all .
That is Mr .
Hector Hogmorton 's fancy cap , ma 'm ; and here , ma 'm , is Mr .
Saul 's rich satin bag , covered with gold net .
He is college salt bearer , I understand , and has a prodigious superb white and gold dress .
But , in my humble opinion , ma 'm , the marshal 's white and purple and orange fancy dress , trimmed with silver , will bear the bell ; though , indeed , I should n't say that , -- for the colonel 's and lieutenant 's , and ensign 's , are beautiful in the extreme .
And , to be sure , nothing could be better imagined than Mr .
Marlborough 's lilac and silver , with a Roman cap .
And it must be allowed that nothing in nature can have a better effect than Mr .
Drake 's flesh-colour and blue , with this Spanish hat , ma 'm , you see .
( The farmer looks over his shoulder from time to time during this speech , with contempt . )
Farmer ( reads the newspaper ) .
French fleet at sea -- Hum !
Landlady .
O gemini : Mr .
Drake 's Spanish hat is the sweetest , tastiest thing !
Mr .
Finsbury , I protest -- Finsb .
Why , ma 'm , I knew a lady of your taste could n't but approve of it .
My own invention entirely , ma 'm .
But it 's nothing to the captain's cap , ma 'm .
Indeed , ma 'm , Mr .
Wheeler , the captain that is to be , has the prettiest taste in dress .
To be sure , his sandals were my suggestion ; but the mantle he has the entire credit of , to do him justice ; and when you see it , ma 'm , you will be really surprised ; for ( for contrast , and elegance , and richness , and lightness , and propriety , and effect , and costume ) you 've never yet seen anything at all to be compared to Captain Wheeler 's mantle , ma 'm .
Farmer ( to the Landlady ) .
Why , now , pray , Mrs .
Landlady , how long may it have been the fashion for milliners to go about in men 's clothes ?
Landlady ( aside to Farmer ) .
Lord , Mr .
Hearty , hush !
This is Mr .
Finsbury , the great man-milliner .
Farm .
The great man-milliner !
This is a sight I never thought to see in Old England .
Finsb .
( packing up band boxes ) .
Well , ma 'm , I 'm glad I have your approbation .
It has ever been my study to please the ladies .
Farm .
( throws a fancy mantle over his frieze coat ) .
And is this the way to please the ladies , Mrs .
Landlady , nowadays ?
Finsb .
( taking off the mantle ) .
Sir , with your leave -- I ask pardon -- but the least thing detriments these tender colours ; and as you have just been eating cheese with your hands -- Farm .
'T is my way to eat cheese with my mouth , man .
Finsb .
MAN !
Farm .
I ask pardon -- man-milliner , I mean .
Enter LANDLORD .
Landlord .
Why , wife !
Landlady .
Wife !
Landlord .
I ask pardon -- Mrs .
Newington , I mean .
Do you know who them ladies are that you have been and turned out of the Dolphin ?
Landlady ( alarmed ) .
Not I , indeed .
Who are they , pray ?
Why , if they are quality it 's no fault of mine .
It is their own fault for coming , like scrubs , without four horses .
Why , if quality will travel the road this way , incognito , how can they expect to be known and treated as quality ?
'T is no fault of mine .
Why did n't you find out sooner who they were , Mr .
Newington ?
What else , in the 'versal world have you to do , but to go basking about in the yards and places with your tankard in your hand , from morning till night ?
What have you else to ruminate , all day long , but to find out who 's who , I say ?
Farm .
Clapper !
clapper !
clapper !
like my mill in a high wind , landlord .
Clapper !
clapper !
clapper ! -- enough to stun a body .
Landlord .
That is not used to it ; but use is all , they say .
Landlady .
Will you answer me , Mr .
Newington ?
Who are the grandees that were in the Dolphin ? -- and what 's become on them ?
Landlord .
Grandees was your own word , wife .
They be not to call grandees ; but I reckon you 'd be sorry not to treat 'em civil , when I tell you their name is Talbot , mother and sister to our young Talbot , of Eton ; he that paid me so handsome for the hunter this very morning .
Landlady .
Mercy !
is that all ?
What a combustion for nothing in life !
Finsb .
For nothing in life , as you say , ma 'm ; that is , nothing in high life , I 'm sure , ma 'm ; nay , I dare a'most venture to swear .
Would you believe it , Mr .
Talbot is one of the few young gentlemen of Eton that has not bespoke from me a fancy dress for this grand Montem ?
Landlady .
There , Mr .
Newington ; there 's your Talbot for you !
and there's your grandees !
O trust me , I know your scrubs at first sight .
Landlord .
Scrubs , I do n't , nor ca n't , nor wo n't call them that pay their debts honestly .
Scrubs , I do n't , nor wo n't , nor ca n't , call them that behave as handsome as young Mr .
Talbot did here to me this morning about the hunter .
A scrub he is not , wife .
Fancy-dress or no fancy-dress , Mr .
Finsbury , this young gentleman is no scrub .
Finsb .
Dear me !
'T was not I said SCRUB .
Did I say scrub ?
Farm .
No matter if you did .
Finsb .
No matter , certainly ; and yet it is a matter ; for I 'm confident I would n't for the world leave it in anyone 's power to say that I said -- that I called -- any young gentleman of Eton a SCRUB !
Why , you know , sir , it might breed a riot !
Farm .
And a pretty figure you 'd make in a riot !
Landlady .
Pray let me hear nothing about riots in my house .
Farm .
Nor about scrubs .
Finsb .
But I beg leave to explain , gentlemen .
All I ventured to remark or suggest was , that as there was some talk of Mr .
Talbot 's being captain to-morrow , I did n't conceive how he could well appear without any dress .
That was all , upon my word and honour .
A good morning to you , gentlemen ; it is time for me to be off .
Mrs .
Newington , you were so obliging as to promise to accommodate me with a return chaise as far as Eton .
( Finsbury bows and exit . )
Farm .
A good day to you and your bandboxes .
There 's a fellow for you now !
Ha !
ha !
ha ! -- A man-milliner , forsooth !
Landlord .
Mrs .
Talbot 's coming -- stand back .
Landlady .
Lord !
why does Bob show them through this way ?
Enter MRS .
TALBOT , leaning on LOUISA ; Waiter showing the way .
Landlady .
You are going on , I suppose , ma'am ?
Waiter ( aside to Landlord ) .
Not if she could help it ; but there 's no beds , since Mr .
Bursal and Miss Bursal 's come .
Landlord .
I say nothing , for it is vain to say more .
But is n't it a pity she ca n't stay for the Montem , poor old lady !
Her son -- as good and fine a lad as ever you saw -- they say , has a chance , too , of being captain .
She may never live to see another such a sight .
( As Mrs .
Talbot walks slowly on , the Farmer puts himself across her way , so as to stop her short . )
Farm .
No offence , madam , I hope ; but I have a good snug farm house , not far off hand ; and if so be you 'd be so good to take a night 's lodging , you and the young lady with you , you 'd have a hearty welcome .
That 's all I can say and you 'd make my wife very happy ; for she 's a good woman , to say nothing of myself .
Landlord .
If I may be so bold to put in my word , madam , you 'd have as good beds , and be as well lodged , with Farmer Hearty , as in e'er a house at Salt Hill .
Mrs .
Talb .
I am very much obliged -- Farm .
O , say nothing o ' that , madam .
I am sure I shall be as much obliged if you do come .
Do , miss , speak for me .
Louisa .
Pray , dear mother -- Farm .
She will .
( Calls behind the scenes . )
Here , waiter !
hostler !
driver !
what 's your name ?
drive the chaise up here to the door , smart , close .
Lean on my arm , madam , and we 'll have you in and home in a whiff .
( Exeunt Mrs .
Talbot , Louisa , Farmer , Landlord and Waiter . )
Landlady ( sola ) .
What a noise and a rout this farmer man makes !
and my husband , with his great broad face , bowing , as great a nincompoop as t'other .
The folks are all bewitched with the old woman , I verily believe .
( Aloud . )
A good morning to you , ladies .
END OF THE FIRST ACT .
ACT THE SECOND .
SCENE I . A field near Eton College ; -- several boys crossing backwards and forwards in the back-ground .
In front , TALBOT , WHEELER , LORD JOHN and BURSAL .
Talbot .
Fair play , Wheeler !
Have at 'em , my boy !
There they stand , fair game !
There 's Bursal there , with his dead forty-five votes at command ; and Lord John with his -- how many live friends ?
Lord John ( coolly ) .
Sir , I have fifty-six friends , I believe .
Talb .
Fifty-six friends , his lordship believes -- Wheeler inclusive , no doubt .
Lord J . That 's as hereafter may be .
Wheeler .
Hereafter !
Oh , fie , my LUD !
You know your own Wheeler has , from the first minute he ever saw you , been your fast friend .
Talb .
Your fast friend from the first minute he ever saw you , my lord !
That 's well hit , Wheeler ; stick to that ; stick fast .
Fifty-six friends , Wheeler INclusive , hey , my lord !
hey , my LUD !
Lord J. Talbot EXclusive , I find , contrary to my expectations .
Talb .
Ay , contrary to your expectations , you find that Talbot is not a dog that will lick the dust : but then there 's enough of the true spaniel breed to be had for whistling for ; hey , Wheeler ?
Bursal ( aside to Wheeler ) .
A pretty electioneerer .
So much the better for you , Wheeler .
Why , unless he bought a vote , he 'd never win one , if he talked from this to the day of judgment .
Wheeler ( aside to Bursal ) .
And as he has no money to buy votes -- he !
he !
he ! -- we are safe enough .
Talb .
That 's well done , Wheeler ; fight the by-battle there with Bursal .
Now you are sure of the main with Lord John .
Lord J . Sure !
I never made Mr .
Wheeler any promise yet .
Wheel .
O ; I ask no promise from his lordship ; we are upon honour : I trust entirely to his lordship 's good nature and generosity , and to his regard for his own family ; I having the honour , though distantly , to be related .
Lord J . Related !
How , Wheeler ?
Wheel .
Connected , I mean , which is next door , as I may say , to being related .
Related slipped out by mistake ; I beg pardon , my Lord John .
Lord J .
Related ! -- a strange mistake , Wheeler .
Talb .
Overshot yourself , Wheeler ; overshot yourself , by all that's awkward .
And yet , till now , I always took you for `` a dead-shot at a yellow-hammer .
`` * * Young noblemen at Oxford wear yellow tufts at the tops of their caps .
Hence their flatterers are said to be dead-shots at yellow-hammers .
Wheel .
( taking Bursal by the arm ) .
Bursal , a word with you .
( Aside to Bursal . )
What a lump of family pride that Lord John is .
Talb .
Keep out of my hearing , Wheeler , lest I should spoil sport .
But never fear : you 'll please Bursal sooner than I shall .
I ca n't , for the soul of me , bring myself to say that Bursal 's not purse-proud , and you can .
Give you joy .
Burs .
A choice electioneerer ! -- ha !
ha !
ha !
Wheel .
( faintly ) .
He !
he !
he ! -- a choice electioneerer , as you say .
( Exeunt Wheeler and Bursal ; manent Lord J. and Talbot . )
Lord J . There was a time , Talbot -- Talb .
There was a time , my lord -- to save trouble and a long explanation- -there was a time when you liked Talbots better than spaniels ; you understand me ?
Lord J. I have found it very difficult to understand you of late , Mr .
Talbot .
Talb .
Yes , because you have used other people 's understandings instead of your own .
Be yourself , my lord .
See with your own eyes , and hear with your own ears , and then you 'll find me still , what I 've been these seven years ; not your understrapper , your hanger-on , your flatterer , but your friend !
If you choose to have me for a friend , here 's my hand .
I am your friend , and you 'll not find a better .
Lord J .
( giving his hand ) .
You are a strange fellow , Talbot ; I thought I never could have forgiven you for what you said last night .
Talb .
What ?
for I do n't keep a register of my sayings .
Oh , it was something about gaming -- Wheeler was flattering your taste for it , and he put me into a passion -- I forget what I said .
But , whatever it was , I'm sure it was well meant , and I believe it was well said .
Lord J . But you laugh at me sometimes to my face .
Talb .
Would you rather I should laugh at you behind your back ?
Lord .
J . But of all things in the world I hate to be laughed at .
Listen to me , and do n't fumble in your pockets while I 'm talking to you .
Talb .
I 'm fumbling for -- oh , here it is .
Now , Lord John , I once did laugh at you behind your back , and what 's droll enough , it was at your back I laughed .
Here 's a caricature I drew of you -- I really am sorry I did it ; but 't is best to show it to you myself .
Lord J .
( aside ) .
It is all I can do to forgive this .
( After a pause , he tears the paper . )
I have heard of this caricature before ; but I did not expect , Talbot , that you would come and show it to me , yourself , Talbot , so handsomely , especially at such a time as this .
Wheeler might well say you are a bad electioneerer .
Talb .
Oh , hang it !
I forgot my election , and your fifty-six friends .
Enter RORY O'RYAN .
Rory ( claps Talbot on the back ) .
Fifty-six friends , have you , Talbot ?
Say seven -- fifty-seven , I mean ; for I 'll lay you a wager , you 've forget me ; and that 's a shame for you , too ; for out of the whole posse-comitatus entirely now , you have not a stauncher friend than Poor little Rory O'Ryan .
And a good right he has to befriend you ; for you stood by him when many who ought to have known better were hunting him down for a wild Irishman .
Now that same wild Irishman has as much gratitude in him as any tame Englishman of them all .
But do n't let 's be talking sintimint ; for , for my share I 'd not give a bogberry a bushel for sintimint , when I could get anything better .
Lord J . And pray , sir , what may a bogberry be ?
Rory .
Phoo !
do n't be playing the innocent , now .
Where have you lived all your life ( I ask pardon , my LARD ) not to know a bogberry when you see or hear of it ?
( Turns to Talbot . )
But what are ye standing idling here for ?
Sure , there 's Wheeler , and Bursal along with him , canvassing out yonder at a terrible fine rate .
And have n't I been huzzaing for you there till I 'm hoarse ?
So I am , and just stepped away to suck an orange for my voice -- ( sucks an orange . )
I am a THOROUGH GOING friend , at anyrate .
Talb .
Now , Rory , you are the best fellow in the world , and a THOROUGH GOING friend ; but have a care , or you 'll get yourself and me into some scrape , before you have done with this violent THOROUGH GOING work .
Rory .
Never fear !
never fear , man ! -- a warm frind and a bitter enemy , that 's my maxim .
Talb .
Yes , but too warm a friend is as bad as a bitter enemy .
Rory .
Oh , never fear me !
I 'm as cool as a cucumber all the time ; and whilst they tink I 'm tinking of nothing in life but making a noise , I make my own snug little remarks in prose and verse , as -- now my voice is after coming back to me , you shall hear , if you plase .
Talb .
I do please .
Rory .
I call it Rory 's song .
Now , mind , I have a verse for everybody -- o ' the leading lads , I mean ; and I shall put 'em in or lave 'em out , according to their inclinations and deserts , wise-a-wee to you , my little frind .
So you comprehend it will be Rory 's song , with variations .
Talbot and Lord John .
Let 's have it ; let 's have it without further preface .
Rory sings .
`` I 'm true game to the last , and no WHEELER for me . ''
Rory .
There 's a stroke , in the first place , for Wheeler , -- you take it ?
Talb .
O yes , yes , we take it ; go on .
Rory sings .
`` I 'm true game to the last , and no Wheeler for me .
Of all birds , beasts , or fishes , that swim in the sea , Webb 'd or finn 'd , black or white , man or child , Whig or Tory , None but Talbot , O , Talbot 's the dog for Rory . ''
Talb .
`` Talbot the dog '' is much obliged to you .
Lord J . But if I have any ear , one of your lines is a foot too long , Mr .
O'Ryan .
Rory .
Phoo , put the best foot foremost for a frind .
Slur it in the singing , and do n't be quarrelling , anyhow , for a foot more or less .
The more feet the better it will stand , you know .
Only let me go on , and you 'll come to something that will plase you .
Rory sings .
`` Then there 's he with the purse that 's as long as my arm . ''
Rory .
That 's Bursal , mind now , whom I mean to allude to in this verse .
Lord J . If the allusion 's good , we shall probably find out your meaning .
Talb .
On with you , Rory , and do n't read us notes on a song .
Lord J . Go on , and let us hear what you say of Bursal .
Rory sings .
`` Then there 's he with the purse that 's as long as my arm ; His father 's a tanner , -- but then where 's the harm ?
Heir to houses , and hunters , and horseponds in fee , Wo n't his skins sure soon buy him a pedigree ? ''
Lord J. Encore !
encore !
Why , Rory , I did not think you could make so good a song .
Rory .
Sure 't was none of I made it -- 't was Talbot here .
Talb .
I !
Rory .
( aside ) .
Not a word : I 'll make you a present of it : sure , then , it 's your own .
Talb .
I never wrote a word of it .
Rory .
( to Lord J . ) .
Phoo , Phoo !
he 's only denying it out of false modesty .
Lord .
J . Well , no matter who wrote it , -- sing it again .
Rory .
Be easy ; so I will , and as many more verses as you will to the back of it .
( Winking at Talbot aside . )
You shall have the credit of all .
( Aloud . )
Put me in when I 'm out , Talbot , and you ( to Lord John ) join -- join .
Rory sings , and Lord John sings with him .
`` Then there 's he with the purse that 's as long as my arm ; His father 's a tanner , -- but then where 's the harm ?
Heir to houses , and hunters , and horseponds in fee , Wo n't his skins sure soon buy him a pedigree ?
There 's my lord with the back that never was bent -- '' ( Lord John stops singing ; Talbot makes signs to Rory to stop ; but Rory does not see him , and sings on . )
`` There 's my lord with the back that never was bent ; Let him live with his ancestors , I am content . ''
( Rory pushes Lord J. and Talbot with his elbows . )
Rory .
Join , join , both of ye -- why do n't you join ?
( Sings . )
`` Who 'll buy my Lord John ?
the arch fishwoman cried , A nice oyster shut up in a choice shell of pride . ''
Rory .
But join or ye spoil all .
Talb .
You have spoiled all , indeed .
Lord J .
( making a formal low bow ) .
Mr .
Talbot , Lord John thanks you .
Rory .
Lord John !
blood and thunder !
I forgot you were by -- quite and clean .
Lord J .
( puts him aside and continues speaking to Talbot ) .
Lord John thanks you , Mr .
Talbot : this is the second part of the caricature .
Lord John thanks you for these proofs of friendship -- Lord John has reason to thank you , Mr .
Talbot .
Rory .
No reason in life now .
Do n't be thanking so much for nothing in life ; or if you must be thanking of somebody , it 's me you ought to thank .
Lord J. I ought and do , sir , for unmasking one who -- Talb .
( warmly ) .
Unmasking , my lord -- Rory ( holding them asunder ) .
Phoo !
phoo !
phoo !
be easy , ca n't ye ? -- there 's no unmasking at all in the case .
My Lord John , Talbot 's writing the song was all a mistake .
Lord J . As much a mistake as your singing it , sir , I presume -- Rory .
Just as much .
'T was all a mistake .
So now do n't you go and make a mistake into a misunderstanding .
It was I made every word of the song out o ' the face * -- that about the back that never was bent , and the ancestors of the oyster , and all .
He did not waste a word of it ; upon my conscience , I wrote it all -- though I 'll engage you did n't think I could write a good thing .
( Lord John turns away . )
I 'm telling you the truth , and not a word of a lie , and yet you wo n't believe me .
* From beginning to end .
Lord J . You will excuse me , sir , if I can not believe two contradictory assertions within two minutes .
Mr .
Talbot , I thank you ( going ) .
( Rory tries to stop Lord John from going , but can not . -- Exit Lord John . )
Rory .
Well , if he WILL go , let him go then , and much good may it do him .
Nay , but do n't you go too .
Talb .
O Rory , what have you done ? -- ( Talbot runs after Lord J . )
Hear me , my lord .
( Exit Talbot . )
Rory .
Hear him !
hear him !
hear him ! -- Well , I 'm point blank mad with myself for making this blunder ; but how could I help it ?
As sure as ever I am meaning to do the best thing on earth , it turns out the worst .
Enter a party of lads , huzzaing .
Rory ( joins . )
Huzza !
huzza ! -- Who , pray , are ye huzzaing for ?
1st Boy .
Wheeler !
Wheeler for ever !
huzza !
Rory .
Talbot !
Talbot for ever !
huzza !
Captain Talbot for ever !
huzza !
2nd Boy .
CAPTAIN he 'll never be , -- at least not to-morrow ; for Lord John has just declared for Wheeler .
lst Boy .
And that turns the scale .
Rory .
Oh , the scale may turn back again .
3rd Boy .
Impossible !
Lord John has just given his promise to Wheeler .
I heard him with my own ears .
( Several speak at once . )
And I heard him ; and I !
and I !
and I ! -- Huzza !
Wheeler for ever !
Rory .
Oh , murder !
murder !
murder !
( Aside . )
This goes to my heart !
it's all my doing .
O , my poor Talbot ! -- murder !
murder !
murder !
But I won't let them see me cast down , and it is good to be huzzaing at all events .
Huzza for Talbot !
Talbot for ever !
huzza !
( Exit . )
Enter WHEELER and BURSAL .
Wheel .
Who was that huzzaing for Talbot ?
( Rory behind the scenes , `` Huzza for Talbot !
Talbot for ever !
huzza ! '' )
Burs .
Pooh , it is only Rory O'Ryan , or the roaring lion as I call him .
Ha !
ha !
ha !
Rory O'Ryan , alias O'Ryan , the roaring lion ; that 's a good one ; put it about -- Rory O'Ryan , the roaring lion , ha !
ha !
ha !
but you do n't take it -- you do n't laugh , Wheeler .
Wheeler .
Ha !
ha !
ha !
O , upon my honour I do laugh ; ha !
ha !
ha !
( Aside ) .
It is the hardest work to laugh at his wit .
( Aloud . )
Rory O'Ryan , the roaring lion -- ha !
ha !
ha !
You know I always laugh , Bursal , at your jokes -- he !
he !
he ! -- ready to kill myself .
Burs .
( sullenly ) .
You are easily killed , then , if that much laughing will do the business .
Wheel .
( coughing ) .
Just then -- something stuck in my throat ; I beg your pardon .
Burs .
( still sullen ) .
Oh , you need not beg my pardon about the matter .
I do n't care whether you laugh or no -- not I . Now you have got Lord John to declare for you , you are above laughing at my jokes , I suppose .
Wheel .
No , upon my word and honour , I DID laugh .
Burs .
( aside ) .
A fig for your word and honour .
( Aloud . )
I know I 'm of no consequence now ; but you 'll remember , that if his lordship has the honour of making you captain , he must have the honour to pay for your captain 's accoutrements ; for I sha'n't pay the piper , I promise you , since I 'm of no consequence .
Wheel .
Of no consequence !
But , my dear Bursal , what could put that into your head ?
that 's the strangest , oddest fancy .
Of no consequence !
Bursal , of no consequence !
Why , everybody that knows anything -- everybody that has seen Bursal House -- knows that you are of the greatest consequence , my dear Bursal .
Burs .
( taking out his watch , and opening it , looks at it ) .
No , I 'm of no consequence .
I wonder that rascal Finsbury is not come yet with the dresses ( still looking at his watch ) .
Wheel .
( aside ) .
If Bursal takes it into his head not to lend me the money to pay for my captain 's dress , what will become of me ?
for I have not a shilling -- and Lord John wo n't pay for me -- and Finsbury has orders not to leave the house till he is paid by everybody .
What will become of me ? -- ( bites his nails ) .
Burs .
( aside ) .
How I love to make him bite his nails !
( Aloud . )
I know I 'm of no consequence .
( Strikes his repeater . )
Wheel .
What a fine repeater that is of yours , Bursal !
It is the best I ever heard .
Burs .
So it well may be ; for it cost a mint of money .
Wheel .
No matter to you what anything costs .
Happy dog as you are !
You roll in money ; and yet you talk of being of no consequence .
Burs .
But I am not of half so much consequence as Lord John -- am I ?
Wheel .
Are you ?
Why , are n't you twice as rich as he !
Burs .
Very true , but I 'm not purse-proud .
Wheel .
You purse-proud !
I should never have thought of such a thing .
Burs .
Nor I , if Talbot had not used the word .
Wheel .
But Talbot thinks everybody purse-proud that has a purse .
Burs .
( aside ) .
Well , this Wheeler does put one into a good humour with one 's self in spite of one 's teeth .
( Aloud . )
Talbot says blunt things ; but I do n't think he 's what you can call clever -- hey , Wheeler ?
Wheel .
Clever ?
Oh , not he .
Burs .
I think I could walk round him .
Wheel .
To be sure you could .
Why , do you know , I 've quizzed him famously myself within this quarter of an hour !
Burs .
Indeed !
I wish I had been by .
Wheel .
So do I , 'faith !
It was the best thing .
I wanted , you see , to get him out of my way , that I might have the field clear for electioneering to-day .
So I bowls up to him with a long face -- such a face as this .
Mr .
Talbot , do you know -- I 'm sorry to tell you , here's Jack Smith has just brought the news from Salt Hill .
Your mother , in getting into the carriage , slipped , and has BROKE her leg , and there she 's lying at a farmhouse , two miles off .
Is not it true , Jack ?
said I. I saw the farmer helping her in with my own eyes , cries Jack .
Off goes Talbot like an arrow .
Quizzed him , quizzed him !
said I. Burs .
Ha !
ha !
ha !
quizzed him indeed , with all his cleverness ; that was famously done .
Wheel .
Ha !
ha !
ha !
With all his cleverness he will be all the evening hunting for the farmhouse and the mother that has broke her leg ; so he is out of our way .
Burs .
But what need have you to want him out of your way , now Lord John has come over to your side ?
You have the thing at a dead beat .
Wheel .
Not so dead either ; for there 's a great independent party , you know ; and if YOU do n't help me , Bursal , to canvass them , I shall be no captain .
It is you I depend upon after all .
Will you come and canvass them with me ?
Dear Bursal , pray -- all depends upon you .
( Pulls him by the arm -- Bursal follows . )
Burs .
Well , if all depends upon me , I 'll see what I can do for you .
( Aside . )
Then I am of some consequence !
Money makes a man of some consequence , I see ; at least with some folks .
SCENE II .
In the back scene a flock of sheep are seen penned .
In front , a party of country lads and lasses , gaily dressed , as in sheep-shearing time , with ribands and garlands of flowers , etc. , are dancing and singing .
Enter PATTY , dressed as the Queen of the Festival , with a lamb in her arms .
The dancers break off when she comes in , and direct their attention towards her .
1st Peasant .
Oh , here comes Patty !
Here comes the Queen o ' the day .
What has kept you from us so long , Patty ?
2nd Peasant .
`` Please your Majesty , '' you should say .
Patty .
This poor little lamb of mine was what kept me so long .
It strayed away from the rest ; and I should have lost him , so I should , for ever , if it had not been for a good young gentleman .
Yonder he is , talking to Farmer Hearty .
That 's the young gentleman who pulled my lamb out of the ditch for me , into which he had fallen -- pretty creature !
1st Peasant .
Pretty creature -- or , your Majesty , whichever you choose to be called -- come and dance with them , and I 'll carry your lamb .
( Exeunt , singing and dancing . )
Enter FARMER HEARTY and TALBOT .
Farmer .
Why , young gentleman , I 'm glad I happened to light upon you here , and so to hinder you from going farther astray , and set your heart at ease like .
Talb .
Thanks , good farmer , you have set my heart at ease , indeed .
But the truth is , they did frighten me confoundedly -- more fool I . Farm .
No fool at all , to my notion .
I should , at your age , ay , or at my age , just the self-same way have been frightened myself , if so be that mention had been made to me , that way , of my own mother 's having broke her leg or so .
And greater , by a great deal , the shame for them that frighted you , than for you to be frighted .
How young gentlemen , now , can bring themselves for to tell such lies , is to me , now , a matter of amazement , like , that I ca n't noways get over .
Talb .
Oh , farmer , such lies are very witty , though you and I do n't just now like the wit of them .
This is fun , this is quizzing ; but you don't know what we young gentlemen mean by quizzing .
Farm .
Ay , but I do though , to my cost , ever since last year .
Look you , now , at yon fine field of wheat .
Well , it was just as fine , and finer , last year , till a young Eton jackanapes -- Talb .
Take care what you say , farmer ; for I am a young Eton jackanapes .
Farm .
No ; but you be not the young Eton jackanapes that I 'm a-thinking on .
I tell you it was this time last year , man ; he was a-horseback , I tell ye , mounted upon a fine bay hunter , out a-hunting , like .
Talb .
I tell you it was this time last year , man , that I was mounted upon a fine bay hunter , out a-hunting .
Farm .
Zooks !
would you argufy a man out of his wits ?
You wo n't go for to tell me that you are that impertinent little jackanapes !
Talb .
No !
no !
I 'll not tell you that I am an impertinent little jackanapes !
Farm ( wiping his forehead ) .
Well , do n't then , for I ca n't believe it ; and you put me out .
Where was I ?
Talb .
Mounted upon a fine bay hunter .
Farm .
Ay , so he was .
`` Here , YOU , '' says he , meaning me -- '' open this gate for me . ''
Now , if he had but a-spoke me fair , I would not have gainsaid him : but he falls to swearing , so I bid him open the gate for himself .
`` There 's a bull behind you , farmer , '' says he .
I turns .
`` Quizzed him ! ''
cries my jackanapes , and off he gallops him , through the very thick of my corn ; but he got a fall , leaping the ditch out yonder , which pacified me , like , at the minute .
So I goes up to see whether he was killed ; but he was not a whit the worse for his tumble .
So I should ha ' fell into a passion with him then , to be sure , about my corn ; but his horse had got such a terrible sprain , I could n't say anything to him ; for I was a- pitying the poor animal .
As fine a hunter as ever you saw !
I am sartain sure he could never come to good after .
Talb .
( aside ) .
I do think , from the description , that this was Wheeler ; and I have paid for the horse which he spoiled !
( Aloud . )
Should you know either the man or the horse again , if you were to see them ?
Farm .
Ay , that I should , to my dying day .
Talb .
Will you come with me , then , and you 'll do me some guineas ' worth of service ?
Farm .
Ay , that I will , with a deal of pleasure ; for you be a civil spoken young gentleman ; and , besides , I do n't think the worse on you for being FRIGHTED a little about your mother ; being what I might ha ' been , at your age , myself ; for I had a mother myself once .
So lead on , master .
( Exeunt . )
END OF THE SECOND ACT .
ACT THE THIRD .
SCENE I . The garden of the `` Windmill Inn , '' at Salt Hill .
MISS BURSAL , MRS .
NEWINGTON , SALLY , the Chambermaid .
( Miss Bursal , in a fainting state , is sitting on a garden stool , and leaning her head against the Landlady .
Sally is holding a glass of water and a smelling bottle . )
Miss Bursal .
Where am I ?
Where am I ?
Landlady .
At the `` Windmill , '' at Salt Hill , young lady ; and ill or well , you ca n't be better .
Sally .
Do you find yourself better since coming into the air , miss ?
Miss B . Better !
Oh , I shall never be better !
( Leans her head on hand , and rocks herself backwards and forwards . )
Landlady .
My dear young lady , do n't take on so .
( Aside . )
Now would I give something to know what it was my Lady Piercefield said to the father , and what the father said to this one , and what 's the matter at the bottom of affairs .
Sally , did you hear anything at the doors ?
Sally ( aside ) .
No , indeed , ma'am ; I never BE 'S at the doors .
Landlady ( aside ) .
Simpleton !
( Aloud . )
But , my dear Miss Bursal , if I may be so bold -- if you 'd only disembosom your mind of what 's on it -- Miss B. Disembosom my mind !
Nonsense !
I 've nothing on my mind .
Pray leave me , madam .
Landlady ( aside ) .
Madam , indeed !
madam , forsooth !
Oh , I 'll make her pay for that !
That MADAM shall go down in the bill , as sure as my name's Newington .
( Landlady , in a higher tone . )
Well , I wish you better , ma'am .
I suppose I 'd best send your own servant ?
Miss B .
( sullenly ) .
Yes , I suppose so .
( To Sally . )
You need not wait , child , nor look so curious .
Sally .
CUR'OUS !
Indeed , miss , if I look a little CUR'OUS , or so ( looking at her dress ) , 't is only because I was FRIGHTED to see you take on , which made me forget my clean apron , when I came out ; and this apron- - Miss B. Hush !
Hush !
child .
Do n't tell me about clean aprons , nor run on with your vulgar talk .
Is there ever a seat one can set on in that _H_arbour yonder ?
Sally .
O dear 'ART , yes , miss ; 't is the pleasantest _H_arbour on _H_earth .
Be pleased to lean on my _H_arm , and you 'll soon be there .
Miss B .
( going ) .
Then tell my woman she need not come to me , and let nobody INTERUDE on me -- do you 'EAR ?
( Aside . )
Oh , what will become of me ?
and the Talbots will soon know it !
And the ponies , and the curricle , and the vis-a-vis -- what will become of them ?
and how shall I make my appearance at the Montem , or any WARE else ?
SCENE II .
LORD JOHN -- WHEELER -- BURSAL .
Wheeler .
Well , but my lord -- Well , but Bursal -- though my Lady Piercefield -- though Miss Bursal is come to Salt Hill , you wo n't leave us all at sixes and sevens .
What can we do without you ?
Lord J . You can do very well without me .
Bursal .
You can do very well without me .
Wheel .
( to Burs . ) .
Impossible ! -- impossible !
You know Mr .
Finsbury will be here just now , with the dresses ; and we have to try them on .
Burs .
And to pay for them .
Wheel .
And to settle about the procession .
And then , my lord , the election is to come on this evening .
You wo n't go till that 's over , as your lordship has PROMISED me your lordship 's vote and interest .
Lord J . My vote I promised you , Mr .
Wheeler ; but I said not a syllable about my INTEREST .
My friends , perhaps , have not been offended , though I have , by Mr .
Talbot .
I shall leave them to their own inclinations .
Burs .
( whistling ) .
Wheugh !
wheugh !
wheugh !
Wheeler , the principal's nothing without the interest .
Wheel .
Oh , the interest will go along with the principal , of course ; for I 'm persuaded , if my lord leaves his friends to their inclinations , it will be the inclination of my lord 's friends to vote as he does , if he says nothing to them to the contrary .
Lord J. I told you , Mr .
Wheeler , that I should leave them to themselves .
Burs .
( still whistling ) .
Well , I 'll do my best to make that father of mine send me off to Oxford .
I 'm sure I 'm fit to go -- along with Wheeler .
Why , you 'd best be my tutor , Wheeler ! -- a devilish good thought .
Wheel .
An excellent thought .
Burs .
And a cursed fine dust we should kick up at Oxford , with your Montem money and all ! -- Money 's THE GO after all .
I wish it was come to my making you my last bow , `` ye distant spires , ye ANTIC towers ! ''
Wheel .
( aside to Lord J . ) .
Ye ANTIC towers ! -- fit for Oxford , my lord !
Lord J . Antique towers , I suppose Mr .
Bursal means .
Burs .
Antique , to be sure ! -- I said antique , did not I , Wheeler ?
Wheel .
O , yes .
Lord J .
( aside ) .
What a mean animal is this !
Enter RORY O'RYAN .
Rory .
Why , now , what 's become of Talbot , I want to know ?
There he is not to be found anywhere in the wide world ; and there 's a hullabaloo amongst his friends for him .
( Wheeler and Bursal wink at one another . )
Wheel .
We know nothing of him .
Lord J. I have not the honour , sir , to be one of Mr .
Talbot 's friends .
It is his own fault , and I am sorry for it .
Rory .
'Faith , so am I , especially as it is mine -- fault I mean ; and especially as the election is just going to come on .
Enter a party of boys , who cry , Finsbury 's come ! -- Finsbury 's come with the dresses !
Wheel .
Finsbury 's come ?
Oh , let us see the dresses , and let us try 'em on to-night .
Burs .
( pushing the crowd ) .
On with ye -- on with ye , there ! -- Let 's try 'em on ! -- Try 'em on -- I 'm to be colonel .
lst Boy .
And I lieutenant .
2nd Boy .
And I ensign .
3rd Boy .
And I college salt-bearer .
4th Boy .
And I oppidan .
5th Boy .
Oh , what a pity I 'm in mourning .
Several speak at once .
And we are servitors .
We are to be the eight servitors .
Wheel .
And I am to be your Captain , I hope .
Come on , my Colonel .
( To Bursal ) .
My lord , you are coming ?
Rory .
By-and-by -- I 've a word in his ear , by your LAVE and his .
Burs .
Why , what the devil stops the way , there ? -- Push on -- on with them .
6th Boy .
I 'm marshal .
Burs .
On with you -- on with you -- who cares what you are ?
Wheel .
( to Bursal , aside ) .
You 'll pay Finsbury for me , you rich Jew ?
( To Lord John . )
Your lordship will remember your lordship 's promise .
Lord J. I do not usually forget my promises , sir ; and therefore need not to be reminded of them .
Wheel .
I beg pardon -- I beg ten thousand pardons , my lord .
Burs .
( taking him by the arm ) .
Come on , man , and do n't stand begging pardon there , or I 'll leave you .
Wheel .
( to Burs . )
I beg pardon , Bursal -- I beg pardon , ten thousand times .
( Exeunt . )
Manent LORD JOHN and RORY O'RYAN .
Rory .
Wheugh ! -- Now put the case .
If I was going to be hanged , for the life of me I could n't be after begging so many pardons for nothing at all .
But many men , many minds -- ( Hums . )
True game to the last !
No Wheeler for me .
Oh , murder !
I forgot , I was nigh letting the cat out o' the bag again .
Lord J . You had something to say to me , sir ?
I wait till your recollection returns .
Rory .
'Faith , and that 's very kind of you ; and if you had always done so , you would never have been offended with me , my lord .
Lord J . You are mistaken , Mr .
O'Ryan , if you think that you did or could offend me .
Rory .
Mistaken was I , then , sure enough ; but we are all liable to mistakes , and should forget and forgive one another ; that 's the way to go through .
Lord J . You will go through the world your own way , Mr .
O'Ryan , and allow me to go through it my way .
Rory .
Very fair -- fair enough -- then we sha n't cross .
But now , to come to the point .
I do n't like to be making disagreeable retrospects , if I could any way avoid it ; nor to be going about the bush , especially at this time o ' day ; when , as Mr .
Finsbury 's come , we 've not so much time to lose as we had .
Is there any truth , then , my lord , in the report that is going about this hour past , that you have gone in a huff , and given your promise there to that sneaking Wheeler to vote for him now ?
Lord J . In answer to your question , sir , I am to inform you that I HAVE promised Mr .
Wheeler to vote for him .
Rory .
In a huff ? -- Ay , now , there it is ! -- Well , when a man 's MAD , to be sure , he 's mad -- and that 's all that can be said about it .
And I know , if I had been MAD myself , I might have done a foolish thing as well as another .
But now , my lord , that you are not mad -- Lord J. I protest , sir , I can not understand you .
In one word , sir , I'm neither mad nor a fool ! -- Your most obedient ( going , angrily ) .
Rory ( holding him ) .
Take care now ; you are going mad with me again .
But phoo !
I like you the better for being mad .
I 'm very often mad myself , and I would not give a potato for one that had never been mad in his life .
Lord J .
( aside ) .
He 'll not be quiet , till he makes me knock him down .
Rory .
Agh !
agh !
agh ! -- I begin to guess whereabouts I am at last .
MAD , in your country , I take it , means fit for Bedlam ; but with us in Ireland , now , 't is no such thing ; it mean 's nothing in life but the being in a passion .
Well , one comfort is , my lord , as you 're a bit of a scholar , we have the Latin proverb in our favour -- '' Ira furor brevis est '' ( Anger is short madness ) .
The shorter the better , I think .
So , my lord , to put an end to whatever of the kind you may have felt against poor Talbot , I'll assure you he 's as innocent o ' that unfortunate song as the babe unborn .
Lord J . It is rather late for Mr .
Talbot to make apologies to me .
Rory .
He make apologies !
Not he , 'faith ; he 'd send me to Coventry , or , maybe , to a worse place , did he but know I was condescending to make this bit of explanation , unknown to him .
But , upon my conscience , I 've a regard for you both , and do n't like to see you go together by the ears .
Now , look you , my lord .
By this book , and all the books that were ever shut and opened , he never saw or heard of that unlucky song of mine till I came out with it this morning .
Lord J . But you told me this morning that it was he who wrote it .
Rory .
For that I take shame to myself , as it turned out ; but it was only a WHITE lie to SARVE a friend , and make him cut a dash with a new song at election time .
But I 've done for ever with white lies .
Lord J .
( walking about as if agitated ) .
I wish you had never begun with them , Mr .
O'Ryan .
This may be a good joke to you ; but it is none to me or Talbot .
So Talbot never wrote a word of the song ?
Rory .
Not a word or syllable , good or bad .
Lord J . And I have given my promise to vote against him .
He 'll lose his election .
Rory .
Not if you 'll give me leave to speak to your friends in your name .
Lord J. I have promised to leave them to themselves ; and Wheeler , I am sure , has engaged them by this time .
Rory .
Bless my body !
I 'll not stay prating here then .
( Exit Rory . )
Lord J .
( follows ) .
But what can have become of Talbot ?
I have been too hasty for once in my life .
Well , I shall suffer for it more than anybody else ; for I love Talbot , since he did not make the song , of which I hate to think .
( Exit . )
SCENE III .
A large hall in Eton College -- A staircase at the end -- Eton lads , dressed in their Montem Dresses in the Scene -- In front , WHEELER ( dressed as Captain ) , BURSAL and FINSBURY .
Fins .
I give you infinite credit , Mr .
Wheeler , for this dress .
Burs .
INFINITE CREDIT !
Why , he 'll have no objection to that -- hey , Wheeler ?
But I thought Finsbury knew you too well to give you credit for anything .
Fins .
You are pleased to be pleasant , sir .
Mr .
Wheeler knows , in that sense of the word , it is out of my power to give him credit , and I 'm sure he would not ask it .
Wheel .
( aside ) .
O , Bursal , pay him , and I 'll pay you tomorrow .
Burs .
Now , if you were n't to be captain after all , Wheeler , what a pretty figure you 'd cut .
Ha !
ha !
ha ! -- Hey ?
Wheel .
Oh , I am as sure of being captain as of being alive .
( Aside . )
Do pay for me , now , there 's a good , dear fellow , before THEY ( looking back ) come up .
Burs .
( aside ) .
I love to make him lick the dust .
( Aloud . )
Hollo !
here 's Finsbury waiting to be paid , lads .
( To the lads who are in the back scene . )
Who has paid , and who has not paid , I say ?
( The lads come forward , and several exclaim at once , ) I 've paid !
I've paid !
Enter LORD JOHN and RORY O'RYAN .
Rory .
Oh , King of Fashion , how fine we are !
Why , now , to look at ye all one might fancy one 's self at the playhouse at once , or at a fancy ball in dear little Dublin .
Come , strike up a dance .
Burs .
Pshaw !
Wherever you come , Rory O'Ryan , no one else can be heard .
Who has paid , and who has not paid , I say ?
Several Boys exclaim .
We 've all paid .
1st Boy .
I 've not paid , but here 's my money .
Several Boys .
We have not paid , but here 's our money .
6th Boy .
Order there , I am marshal .
All that have paid march off to the staircase , and take your seats there , one by one .
March !
( As they march by , one by one , so as to display their dresses , Mr .
Finsbury bows , and says , ) A thousand thanks , gentlemen .
Thank you , gentlemen .
Thanks , gentlemen .
The finest sight ever I saw out of Lon'on .
Rory , as each lad passes , catches his arm , Are you a TalbotITE or a WheelerITE ?
To each who answers `` A Wheelerite , '' Rory replies , `` Phoo !
dance off , then .
Go to the devil and shake yourself .
`` * Each who answers `` A Talbotite , '' Rory shakes by the hand violently , singing , `` Talbot , oh , Talbot 's the dog for Rory . ''
* This is the name of a country dance .
When they have almost all passed , Lord John says , But where can Mr .
Talbot be all this time ?
Burs .
Who knows ?
Who cares ?
Wheel .
A pretty electioneerer !
( Aside to Bursal . )
Finsbury 's waiting to be paid .
Lord J . You do n't wait for me , Mr .
Finsbury .
You know , I have settled with you .
Fins .
Yes , my lord -- yes .
Many thanks : and I have left your lordship's dress here , and everybody 's dress , I believe , as bespoke .
Burs .
Here , Finsbury , is the money for Wheeler , who , between you and me , is as poor as a rat .
Wheeler ( affecting to laugh . ) .
Well , I hope I shall be as rich as a Jew to-morrow .
( Bursal counts money , in an ostentatious manner , into Finsbury 's hand . )
Fins .
A thousand thanks for all favours .
Rory .
You will be kind enough to LAVE Mr .
Talbot 's dress with me , Mr .
Finsbury , for I 'm a friend .
Fins .
Indubitably , sir : but the misfortune is -- he !
he !
he ! -- Mr .
Talbot , sir , has bespoke no dress .
Your servant , gentlemen .
( Exit Finsbury . )
Burs .
So your friend Mr .
Talbot could not afford to bespeak a dress -- ( Bursal and Wheeler laugh insolently . )
How comes that , I wonder ?
Lord J . If I 'm not mistaken , here comes Talbot to answer for himself .
Rory .
But who , in the name of St .
Patrick , has he along with him ?
Enter TALBOT and LANDLORD .
Talb .
Come in along with us , Farmer Hearty -- come in .
( Whilst the Farmer comes in , the boys who were sitting on the stairs , rise and exclaim , ) Whom have we here ?
What now ?
Come down , lads ; here 's more fun .
Rory .
What 's here , Talbot ?
Talb .
An honest farmer , and a good natured landlord , who would come here along with me to speak -- Farm .
( interrupting ) .
To speak the truth -- ( strikes his stick on the ground ) .
Landlord ( unbuttoning his waistcoat ) .
But I am so hot -- so short-winded , that ( panting and puffing ) -- that for the soul and body of me , I can not say what I have got for to say .
Rory .
'Faith , now , the more short winded a story , the better , to my fancy .
Burs .
Wheeler , what 's the matter , man ?
you look as if your under jaw was broke .
Farm .
The matter is , young gentlemen , that there was once upon a time a fine , bay hunter .
Wheel .
( squeezing up to Talbot , aside ) .
Do n't expose me , do n't let him tell .
( To the Farmer . )
I 'll pay for the corn I spoiled .
( To the Landlord . )
I 'll pay for the horse .
Farm .
I does not want to be paid for my corn .
The short of it is , young gentlemen , this 'un here , in the fine thing-em-bobs ( pointing to Wheeler ) , is a shabby fellow ; he went and spoiled Master Newington 's best hunter .
Land .
( panting ) .
Ruinationed him !
ruinationed him !
Rory .
But was that all the shabbiness ?
Now I might , or any of us might , have had such an accident as that .
I suppose he paid the gentleman for the horse , or will do so , in good time .
Land .
( holding his sides ) .
Oh , that I had but a little breath in this body o ' mine to speak all -- speak on , Farmer .
Farm .
( striking his stick on the floor ) .
Oons , sir , when a man 's put out , he ca n't go on with his story .
Omnes .
Be quiet , Rory -- hush !
( Rory puts his finger on his lips . )
Farm .
Why , sir , I was a-going to tell you the shabbiness -- why , sir , he did not pay the landlord , here , for the horse ; but he goes and says to the landlord , here -- '' Mr .
Talbot had your horse on the self-same day ; 'twas he did the damage ; 't is from he you must get your money . ''
So Mr .
Talbot , here , who is another sort of a gentleman ( though he has not so fine a coat ) would not see a man at a loss , that could not afford it ; and not knowing which of 'em it was that spoiled the horse , goes , when he finds the other would not pay a farthing , and pays all .
Rory ( rubbing his hands ) .
There 's Talbot for ye .
And , now , gentlemen ( to Wheeler and Bursal ) , you guess the RASON , as I do , I suppose , why he bespoke no dress ; he had not money enough to be fine -- and honest , too .
You are very fine , Mr .
Wheeler , to do you justice .
Lord J. Pray , Mr .
O'Ryan , let the farmer go on ; he has more to say .
How did you find out , pray , my good friend , that it was not Talbot who spoiled the horse !
Speak loud enough to be heard by everybody .
Farm .
Ay , that I will -- I say ( very loudly ) I say I saw him there ( pointing to Wheeler ) take the jump which strained the horse ; and I'm ready to swear to it .
Yet he let another pay ; there 's the shabbiness .
( A general groan from all the lads .
`` Oh , shabby Wheeler , shabby !
I'll not vote for shabby Wheeler ! '' )
Lord J .
( aside ) .
Alas !
I must vote for him .
Rory sings .
`` True game to the last ; no Wheeler for me ; Talbot , oh , Talbot 's the dog for me . ''
( Several voices join the chorus . )
Burs .
Wheeler , if you are not chosen Captain , you must see and pay me for the dress .
Wheel .
I am as poor as a rat .
Rory .
Oh , yes !
oh yes !
hear ye !
hear ye , all manner of men -- the election is now going to begin forthwith in the big field , and Rory O'Ryan holds the poll for Talbot .
Talbot for ever ! -- huzza !
( Exit Rory , followed by the Boys , who exclaim `` Talbot for ever ! -- huzza ! ''
The Landlord and Farmer join them . )
Lord J. Talbot , I am glad you are what I always thought you -- I 'm glad you did not write that odious song .
I would not lose such a friend for all the songs in the world .
Forgive me for my hastiness this morning .
I 've punished myself -- I 've promised to vote for Wheeler .
Talb .
Oh , no matter whom you vote for , my lord , if you are still my friend , and if you know me to be yours .
( They shake hands . )
Lord J. I must not say , `` Huzza for Talbot ! ''
( Exeunt . )
SCENE IV .
WINDSOR TERRACE .
LADY PIERCEFIELD , MRS .
TALBOT , LOUISA , and a little girl of six years old , LADY VIOLETTA , daughter to LADY PIERCEFIELD .
Violetta ( looking at a paper which Louisa holds ) .
I like it VERY much .
Lady P. What is it that you like VERY much , Violetta ?
Violet .
You are not to know yet , mamma ; it is -- I may tell her that -- it is a little drawing that Louisa is doing for me .
Louisa , I wish you would let me show it to mamma .
Louisa .
And welcome , my dear ; it is only a sketch of `` The Little Merchants , '' a story which Violetta was reading , and she asked me to try to draw the pictures of the little merchants for her .
( Whilst Lady P. looks at the drawing , Violetta says to Louisa ) But are you in earnest , Louisa , about what you were saying to me just now , -- quite in earnest ?
Louisa .
Yes , in earnest , -- quite in earnest , my dear .
Violet .
And may I ask mamma , NOW ?
Louisa .
If you please , my dear .
Violet .
( runs to her mother ) .
Stoop down to me , mamma ; I 've something to whisper to you .
( Lady Piercefield stoops down ; Violetta throws her arms round her mother 's neck . )
Violet .
( aside to her mother ) .
Mamma , do you know -- you know you want a governess for me .
Lady P. Yes , if I could find a good one .
Violet .
( aloud ) .
Stoop again , mamma , I 've more to whisper .
( Aside to her mother ) .
SHE says she will be my governess , if you please .
Lady P .
SHE ! -- who is SHE ?
Violet .
Louisa .
Lady P .
( patting Violetta 's cheek ) .
You are a little fool .
Miss Talbot is only playing with you .
Violet .
No , indeed , mamma ; she is in earnest ; are not you , Louisa ? -- Oh , say yes !
Louisa .
Yes .
Violet .
( claps her hands ) .
YES , mamma ; do you hear YES ?
Louisa .
If Lady Piercefield will trust you to my care , I am persuaded that I should be much happier as your governess , my good little Violetta , than as an humble dependent of Miss Bursal 's .
( Aside to her mother . )
You see that , now I am put to the trial , I keep to my resolution , dear mother .
Mrs .
T. Your ladyship would not be surprised at this offer of my Louisa , if you had heard , as we have done within these few hours , of the loss of the East India ship in which almost our whole property was embarked .
Louisa .
The Bombay Castle is wrecked .
Lady P. The Bombay Castle !
I have the pleasure to tell you that you are misinformed -- it was the Airly Castle that was wrecked .
Louisa and Mrs .
T. Indeed !
Lady P. Yes ; you may depend upon it -- it was the Airly Castle that was lost .
You know I am just come from Portsmouth , where I went to meet my brother , Governor Morton , who came home with the last India fleet , and from whom I had the intelligence .
( Here Violetta interrupts , to ask her mother for her nosegay -- Lady P. gives it to her , then goes on speaking . )
Lady P. They were in such haste , foolish people !
to carry their news to London , that they mistook one castle for another .
But do you know that Mr .
Bursal loses fifty thousand pounds , it is said , by the Airly Castle !
When I told him she was lost , I thought he would have dropped down .
However , I found he comforted himself afterwards with a bottle of Burgundy : but poor Miss Bursal has been in hysterics ever since .
Mrs .
T. Poor girl !
My Louisa , YOU did not fall into hysterics , when I told you of the loss of our whole fortune .
( Violetta , during this dialogue , has been seated on the ground making up a nosegay . )
Violet .
( aside ) .
Fall into hysterics !
What are hysterics , I wonder .
Louisa .
Miss Bursal is much to be pitied ; for the loss of wealth will be the loss of happiness to her .
Lady P. It is to be hoped that the loss may at least check the foolish pride and extravagance of young Bursal , who , as my son tells me -- ( A cry of `` Huzza !
huzza ! ''
behind the scenes . )
Enter LORD JOHN .
Lord J .
( hastily ) .
How d 'ye do , mother !
Miss Talbot , I give you joy .
Lady P. Take breath -- take breath .
Louisa .
It is my brother .
Mrs .
T. Here he is ! -- Hark !
hark !
( A cry behind the scenes of `` Talbot and truth for ever !
Huzza ! '' )
Louisa .
They are chairing him .
Lord J . Yes , they are chairing him ; and he has been chosen for his honourable conduct , not for his electioneering skill ; for , to do him justice , Coriolanus himself was not a worse electioneerer .
Enter RORY O'RYAN and another Eton lad , carrying TALBOT in a chair , followed by a crowd of Eton lads .
Rory .
By your LAVE , my lord -- by your LAVE , ladies .
Omnes .
Huzza !
Talbot and truth for ever !
Huzza !
Talb .
Set me down !
There 's my mother !
There 's my sister !
Rory .
Easy , easy .
Set him down ?
No such TING !
give him t'other huzza !
There 's nothing like a good loud huzza in this world .
Yes , there is !
for , as my Lord John said just now , out of some book , or out of his own head , -- `` One self-approving hour whole years outweighs , Of stupid starers and of loud huzzas . ''
CURTAIN FALLS .
FORGIVE AND FORGET .
In the neighbourhood of a seaport town in the west of England , there lived a gardener , who had one son , called Maurice , to whom he was very partial .
One day his father sent him to the neighbouring town to purchase some garden seeds for him .
When Maurice got to the seed-shop , it was full of people , who were all impatient to be served : first a great tall man , and next a great fat woman pushed before him ; and he stood quietly beside the counter , waiting till somebody should be at leisure to attend to him .
At length , when all the other people who were in the shop had got what they wanted , the shopman turned to Maurice -- '' And what do you want , my patient little fellow ? ''
said he .
`` I want all these seeds for my father , '' said Maurice , putting a list of seeds into the shopman 's hand ; `` and I have brought money to pay for them all . ''
The seedsman looked out all the seeds that Maurice wanted , and packed them up in paper : he was folding up some painted lady-peas , when , from a door at the back of the shop , there came in a square , rough-faced man , who exclaimed , the moment he came in , `` Are the seeds I ordered ready ? -- The wind 's fair -- they ought to have been aboard yesterday .
And my china jar , is it packed up and directed ?
where is it ? ''
`` It is up there on the shelf over your head , sir , '' answered the seedsman .
`` It is very safe , you see ; but we have not had time to pack it yet .
It shall be done to-day ; and we will get the seeds ready for you , sir , immediately . ''
`` Immediately !
then stir about it .
The seeds will not pack themselves up .
Make haste , pray . ''
`` Immediately , sir , as soon as I have done up the parcel for this little boy . ''
`` What signifies the parcel for this little boy ?
He can wait , and I can not -- wind and tide wait for no man .
Here , my good lad , take your parcel , and sheer off , '' said the impatient man ; and , as he spoke , he took up the parcel of seeds from the counter , as the shopman stooped to look for a sheet of thick brown paper and packthread to tie it up .
The parcel was but loosely folded up , and as the impatient man lifted it , the weight of the peas which were withinside of it burst the paper , and all the seeds fell out upon the floor , whilst Maurice in vain held his hands to catch them .
The peas rolled to all parts of the shop ; the impatient man swore at them , but Maurice , without being out of humour , set about collecting them as fast as possible .
Whilst the boy was busied in this manner , the man got what seeds he wanted ; and as he was talking about them , a sailor came into the shop , and said , `` Captain , the wind has changed within these five minutes , and it looks as if we should have ugly weather . ''
`` Well , I 'm glad of it , '' replied the rough faced man , who was the captain of a ship .
`` I am glad to have a day longer to stay ashore , and I've business enough on my hands . ''
The captain pushed forward towards the shop door .
Maurice , who was kneeling on the floor , picking up his seeds , saw that the captain 's foot was entangled in some packthread which hung down from the shelf on which the china jar stood .
Maurice saw that , if the captain took one more step forward , he must pull the string , so that it would throw down the jar , round the bottom of which the packthread was entangled .
He immediately caught hold of the captain 's leg , and stopped him .
`` Stay !
Stand still , sir ! ''
said he , `` or you will break your china jar . ''
The man stood still , looked , and saw how the packthread had caught in his shoe buckle , and how it was near dragging down his beautiful china jar .
`` I am really very much obliged to you , my little fellow , '' said he .
`` You have saved my jar , which I would not have broken for ten guineas , for it is for my wife , and I 've brought it safe from abroad many a league .
It would have been a pity if I had broken it just when it was safe landed .
I am really much obliged to you , my little fellow , this was returning good for evil .
I am sorry I threw down your seeds , as you are such a good natured , forgiving boy .
Be so kind , '' continued he , turning to the shopman , `` as to reach down that china jar for me . ''
The shopman lifted down the jar very carefully , and the captain took off the cover , and pulled out some tulip roots .
`` You seem , by the quantity of seeds you have got , to belong to a gardener .
Are you fond of gardening ? ''
said he to Maurice .
`` Yes , sir , '' replied Maurice , `` very fond of it ; for my father is a gardener , and he lets me help him at his work , and he has given me a little garden of my own . ''
`` Then here are a couple of tulip-roots for you ; and if you take care of them , I 'll promise you that you will have the finest tulips in England in your little garden .
These tulips were given to me by a Dutch merchant , who told me that they were some of the rarest and finest in Holland .
They will prosper with you , I 'm sure , wind and weather permitting . ''
Maurice thanked the gentleman , and returned home , eager to show his precious tulip-roots to his father , and to a companion of his , the son of a nurseryman , who lived near him .
Arthur was the name of the nurseryman 's son .
The first thing Maurice did , after showing his tulip-roots to his father , was to run to Arthur 's garden in search of him .
Their gardens were separated only by a low wall of loose stones : `` Arthur !
Arthur !
where are you ?
Are you in your garden !
I want you . ''
But Arthur made no answer , and did not , as usual , come running to meet his friend .
`` I know where you are , '' continued Maurice , `` and I 'm coming to you as fast as the raspberry-bushes will let me .
I have good news for you -- something you'll be delighted to see , Arthur ! -- Ha ! -- but here is something that I am not delighted to see , I am sure , '' said poor Maurice , who , when he had got through the raspberry-bushes , and had come in sight of his own garden , beheld his bell-glass -- his beloved bell-glass , under which his cucumbers were grown so finely -- his only bell-glass , broken to pieces !
`` I am sorry for it , '' said Arthur , who stood leaning upon his spade in his own garden ; `` I am afraid you will be very angry with me . ''
`` Why , was it you , Arthur , broke my bell-glass !
Oh , how could you do so ? ''
`` I was throwing weeds and rubbish over the wall , and by accident a great lump of couch-grass , with stones hanging to the roots , fell upon your bell-glass , and broke it , as you see . ''
Maurice lifted up the lump of couch-grass , which had fallen through the broken glass upon his cucumbers , and he looked at his cucumbers for a moment in silence -- '' Oh , my poor cucumbers !
you must all die now .
I shall see all your yellow flowers withered tomorrow ; but it is done , and it can not be helped ; so , Arthur , let us say no more about it . ''
`` You are very good ; I thought you would have been angry .
I am sure I should have been exceedingly angry if you had broken the glass , if it had been mine . ''
`` Oh , forgive and forget , as my father always says ; that 's the best way .
Look what I have got for you . ''
Then he told Arthur the story of the captain of the ship , and the china jar ; the seeds having been thrown down , and of the fine tulip-roots which had been given to him ; and Maurice concluded by offering one of the precious roots to Arthur , who thanked him with great joy , and repeatedly said , `` How good you were not to be angry with me for breaking your bell-glass !
I am much more sorry for it than if you had been in a passion with me ! ''
Arthur now went to plant his tulip-root : and Maurice looked at the beds which his companion had been digging , and at all the things which were coming up in his garden .
`` I do n't know how it is , '' said Arthur , `` but you always seem as glad to see the things in my garden coming up , and doing well , as if they were all your own .
I am much happier since my father came to live here , and since you and I have been allowed to work and to play together , than I ever was before ; for you must know , before we came to live here , I had a cousin in the house with me , who used to plague me .
He was not nearly so good-natured as you are .
He never took pleasure in looking at my garden , or at anything that I did that was well done ; and he never gave me a share of anything that he had ; and so I did not like him ; how could I ?
But , I believe that hating people makes us unhappy ; for I know I never was happy when I was quarrelling with him ; and I am always happy with you , Maurice .
You know we never quarrel . ''
It would be well for all the world if they could be convinced , like Arthur , that to live in friendship is better than to quarrel .
It would be well for all the world if they followed Maurice 's maxim of `` Forgive and Forget , '' when they receive , or when they imagine that they receive , an injury .
Arthur 's father , Mr .
Oakly , the nurseryman , was apt to take offence at trifles ; and when he thought that any of his neighbours disobliged him , he was too proud to ask them to explain their conduct ; therefore he was often mistaken in his judgment of them .
He thought that it showed SPIRIT , to remember and to resent an injury ; and , therefore , though he was not an ill-natured man , he was sometimes led , by this mistaken idea of SPIRIT , to do ill-natured things : `` A warm friend and a bitter enemy , '' was one of his maxims , and he had many more enemies than friends .
He was not very rich , but he was proud ; and his favourite proverb was , `` Better live in spite than in pity . ''
When first he settled near Mr .
Grant , the gardener , he felt inclined to dislike him , because he was told that Mr .
Grant was a Scotchman , and he had a prejudice against Scotchmen ; all of whom he believed to be cunning and avaricious , because he had once been over-reached by a Scotch peddler .
Grant 's friendly manners in some degree conquered this prepossession but still he secretly suspected that THIS CIVILITY , as he said , `` was all show , and that he was not , nor could not , being a Scotchman , be such a hearty friend as a true-born Englishman . ''
Grant had some remarkably fine raspberries .
The fruit was so large , as to be quite a curiosity .
When it was in season , many strangers came from the neighbouring town , which was a sea-bathing place , to look at these raspberries , which obtained the name of Brobdingnag raspberries .
`` How came you , pray , neighbour Grant , if a man may ask , by these wonderful fine raspberries ? ''
said Mr .
Oakly , one evening , to the gardener .
`` That 's a secret , '' replied Grant , with an arch smile .
`` Oh , in case it 's a secret , I 've no more to say ; for I never meddle with any man 's secrets that he does not choose to trust me with .
But I wish , neighbour Grant , you would put down that book .
You are always poring over some book or another when a man comes to see you , which is not , according to my notions ( being a plain , UNLARNED Englishman bred and born ) , so civil and neighbourly as might be . ''
Mr .
Grant hastily shut his book , but remarked , with a shrewd glance at his son , that it was in that book he found his Brobdingnag raspberries .
`` You are pleased to be pleasant upon them that have not the luck to be as book-LARNED as yourself , Mr .
Grant ; but I take it , being only a plain spoken Englishman , as I observed afore , that one is to the full as like to find a raspberry in one 's garden as in one 's book , Mr .
Grant . ''
Grant , observing that his neighbour spoke rather in a surly tone , did not contradict him ; being well versed in the Bible , he knew that `` A soft word turneth away wrath , '' and he answered , in a good humoured voice , `` I hear , neighbour Oakly , you are likely to make a great deal of money of your nursery this year .
Here 's to the health of you and yours , not forgetting the seedling larches , which I see are coming on finely . ''
`` Thank ye , neighbour , kindly ; the larches are coming on tolerably well , that 's certain ; and here 's to your good health , Mr .
Grant -- you and yours , not forgetting your , what dye call 'em raspberries '' -- ( drinks ) -- and , after a pause , resumes , `` I 'm not apt to be a beggar , neighbour , but if you could give me -- '' Here Mr .
Oakly was interrupted by the entrance of some strangers , and he did finish making his request -- Mr .
Oakly was not , as he said of himself , apt to ask favours , and nothing but Grant 's cordiality could have conquered his prejudices , so far as to tempt him to ask a favour from a Scotchman .
He was going to have asked for some of the Brobdingnag raspberry-plants .
The next day the thought of the raspberry-plants recurred to his memory , but being a bashful man , he did not like to go himself on purpose to make his request , and he desired his wife , who was just setting out to market , to call at Grant 's gate , and , if he was at work in his garden , to ask him for a few plants of his raspberries .
The answer which Oakly 's wife brought to him was that Mr .
Grant had not a raspberry-plant in the world to give him , and that if he had ever so many , he would not give one away , except to his own son .
Oakly flew into a passion when he received such a message , declared it was just such a mean , shabby trick as might have been expected from a Scotchman -- called himself a booby , a dupe , and a blockhead , for ever having trusted to the civil speeches of a Scotchman -- swore that he would die in the parish workhouse before he would ever ask another favour , be it ever so small , from a Scotchman ; related to his wife , for the hundredth time , the way in which he had been taken in by the Scotch peddler ten years ago , and concluded by forswearing all further intercourse with Mr .
Grant , and all belonging to him .
`` Son Arthur , '' said he , addressing himself to the boy , who just then came in from work -- '' Son Arthur , do you hear me ?
let me never again see you with Grant 's son . ''
`` With Maurice , father ? ''
`` With Maurice Grant , I say ; I forbid you from this day and hour forward to have anything to do with him . ''
`` Oh , why , dear father ? ''
`` Ask no questions but do as I bid you . ''
Arthur burst out a crying , and only said , `` Yes , father , I 'll do as you bid me , to be sure . ''
`` Why now , what does the boy cry for ?
Is there no other boy , simpleton , think you , to play with , but this Scotchman 's son !
I 'll find out another play-fellow for ye , child , if that be all . ''
`` That 's not all , father , '' said Arthur , trying to stop himself from sobbing ; `` but the thing is , I shall never have such another play-fellow , - -I shall never have such another friend as Maurice Grant . ''
`` Like father like son -- you may think yourself well off to have done with him . ''
`` Done with him !
Oh , father , and shall I never go again to work in his garden , and may not he come to mine ? ''
`` No , '' replied Oakly , sturdily ; `` his father has used me uncivil , and no man shall use me uncivil twice .
I say no .
Wife , sweep up this hearth .
Boy , do n't take on like a fool ; but eat thy bacon and greens , and let's hear no more of Maurice Grant . ''
Arthur promised to obey his father .
He only begged that he might once more speak to Maurice , and tell him that it was by his father 's orders he acted .
This request was granted ; but when Arthur further begged to know what reason he might give for this separation , his father refused to tell his reasons .
The two friends took leave of one another very sorrowfully .
Mr .
Grant , when he heard of all this , endeavoured to discover what could have offended his neighbour ; but all explanation was prevented by the obstinate silence of Oakly .
Now , the message which Grant really sent about the Brobdingnag raspberries was somewhat different from that which Mr .
Oakly received .
The message was , that the raspberries were not Mr .
Grant 's ; that therefore he had no right to give them away ; that they belonged to his son Maurice , and that this was not the right time of year for planting them .
This message had been unluckily misunderstood .
Grant gave his answer to his wife ; she to a Welsh servant-girl , who did not perfectly comprehend her mistress ' broad Scotch ; and she in her turn could not make herself intelligible to Mrs .
Oakly , who hated the Welsh accent , and whose attention , when the servant-girl delivered the message , was principally engrossed by the management of her own horse .
The horse , on which Mrs .
Oakly rode this day being ill-broken , would not stand still quietly at the gate , and she was extremely impatient to receive her answer , and to ride on to market .
Oakly , when he had once resolved to dislike his neighbour Grant , could not long remain without finding out fresh causes of complaint .
There was in Grant 's garden a plum-tree , which was planted close to the loose stone wall that divided the garden from the nursery .
The soil in which the plum tree was planted happened not to be quite so good as that which was on the opposite side of the wall , and the plum-tree had forced its way through the wall , and gradually had taken possession of the ground which it liked best .
Oakly thought the plum-tree , as it belonged to Mr .
Grant , had no right to make its appearance on his ground : an attorney told him that he might oblige Grant to cut it down ; but Mr .
Grant refused to cut down his plum- tree at the attorney 's desire , and the attorney persuaded Oakly to go to law about the business , and the lawsuit went on for some months .
The attorney , at the end of this time , came to Oakly with a demand for money to carry on his suit , assuring him that , in a short time , it would be determined in his favour .
Oakly paid his attorney ten golden guineas , remarked that it was a great sum for him to pay , and that nothing but the love of justice could make him persevere in this lawsuit about a bit of ground , `` which , after all , '' said he , `` is not worth twopence .
The plum- tree does me little or no damage , but I do n't like to be imposed upon by a Scotchman . ''
The attorney saw and took advantage of Oakly 's prejudice against the natives of Scotland ; and he persuaded him , that to show the SPIRIT of a true-born Englishman it was necessary , whatever it might cost him , to persist in this law suit .
It was soon after this conversation with the attorney that Mr .
Oakly walked , with resolute steps , towards the plum-tree , saying to himself , '' If it cost me a hundred pounds I will not let this cunning Scotchman get the better of me . ''
Arthur interrupted his father 's reverie , by pointing to a book and some young plants which lay upon the wall .
`` I fancy , father , '' said he , `` those things are for you , for there is a little note directed to you , in Maurice 's handwriting .
Shall I bring it to you ? ''
`` Yes , let me read it , child , since I must . ''
It contained these words : '' DEAR MR .
OAKLY , -- I do n't know why you have quarrelled with us ; I am very sorry for it .
But though you are angry with me , I am not angry with you .
I hope you will not refuse some of my Brobdingnag raspberry-plants , which you asked for a great while ago , when we were all good friends .
It was not the right time of the year to plant them , which was the reason they were not sent to you ; but it is just the right time to plant them now ; and I send you the book , in which you will find the reason why we always put seaweed ashes about their roots ; and I have got some seaweed ashes for you .
You will find the ashes in the flower-pot upon the wall .
I have never spoken to Arthur , nor he to me , since you bid us not .
So , wishing your Brobdingnag raspberries may turn out as well as ours , and longing to be all friends again , I am , with love to dear Arthur and self , `` Your affectionate neighbour 's son , `` MAURICE GRANT .
`` P.S. -- It is now about four months since the quarrel began , and that is a very long while . ''
A great part of the effect of this letter was lost upon Oakly , because he was not very expert in reading writing , and it cost him much trouble to spell it and put it together .
However , he seemed affected by it , and said , `` I believe this Maurice loves you well enough , Arthur , and he seems a good sort of boy ; but as to the raspberries , I believe all that he says about them is but an excuse ; and , at anyrate , as I could not get 'em when I asked for them , I 'll not have 'em now .
Do you hear me , I say , Arthur ?
What are you reading there ? ''
Arthur was reading the page that was doubled down in the book , which Maurice had left along with the raspberry-plants upon the wall .
Arthur read aloud as follows : -- ( Monthly Magazine , Dec .
'98 , p .
421 . )
`` There is a sort of strawberry cultivated at Jersey , which is almost covered with seaweed in the winter , in like manner as many plants in England are with litter from the stable .
These strawberries are usually of the largeness of a middle-sized apricot , and the flavour is particularly grateful .
In Jersey and Guernsey , situate scarcely one degree farther south than Cornwall , all kinds of fruit , pulse , and vegetables are produced in their seasons a fortnight or three weeks sooner than in England , even on the southern shores ; and snow will scarcely remain twenty-four hours on the earth .
Although this may be attributed to these islands being surrounded with a salt , and consequently a moist atmosphere , yet the ashes ( seaweed ashes ) made use of as manure , may also have their portion of influence .
`` * * It is necessary to observe that this experiment has never been actually tried upon raspberry-plants .
`` And here , '' continued Arthur , `` is something written with a pencil , on a slip of paper , and it is Maurice 's writing .
I will read it to you .
`` 'When I read in this book what is said about the strawberries growing as large as apricots , after they had been covered over with seaweed , I thought that perhaps seaweed ashes might be good for my father's raspberries ; and I asked him if he would give me leave to try them .
He gave me leave , and I went directly and gathered together some seaweed that had been cast on shore ; and I dried it , and burned it , and then I manured the raspberries with it , and the year afterwards the raspberries grew to the size that you have seen .
Now , the reason I tell you this is , first , that you may know how to manage your raspberries , and next , because I remember you looked very grave , as if you were not pleased with my father , Mr .
Grant , when he told you that the way by which he came by his Brobdingnag raspberries was a secret .
Perhaps this was the thing that has made you so angry with us all ; for you never have come to see father since that evening .
Now I have told you all I know ; and so I hope you will not be angry with us any longer . ' ''
Mr .
Oakly was much pleased by this openness , and said , `` Why now , Arthur , this is something like , this is telling one the thing one wants to know , without fine speeches .
This is like an Englishman more than a Scotchman .
Pray , Arthur , do you know whether your friend Maurice was born in England or in Scotland ? ''
`` No , indeed , sir , I do n't know -- I never asked -- I did not think it signified .
All I know is , that wherever he was born , he is VERY good .
Look , papa , my tulip is blowing . ''
`` Upon my word , '' said his father , `` this will be a beautiful tulip ! ''
`` It was given to me by Maurice . ''
`` And did you give him nothing for it ? ''
was the father 's inquiry .
`` Nothing in the world ; and he gave it to me just at the time when he had good cause to be angry with me , just when I had broken his bell-glass . ''
`` I have a great mind to let you play together again , '' said Arthur's father .
`` Oh , if you would , '' cried Arthur , clapping his hands , `` how happy we should be !
Do you know , father , I have often sat for an hour at a time up in that crab-tree , looking at Maurice at work in his garden , and wishing that I was at work with him . ''
Here Arthur was interrupted by the attorney , who came to ask Mr .
Oakly some question about the lawsuit concerning the plum-tree .
Oakly showed him Maurice 's letter ; and to Arthur 's extreme astonishment , the attorney had no sooner read it , than he exclaimed , `` What an artful little gentleman this is !
I never , in the course of all my practice , met with anything better .
Why , this is the most cunning letter I ever read . ''
`` Where 's the cunning ? ''
said Oakly , and he put on his spectacles .
`` My good sir , do n't you see , that all this stuff about Brobdingnag raspberries is to ward off your suit about the plum-tree ?
They know -- that is , Mr .
Grant , who is sharp enough , knows -- that he will be worsted in that suit ; that he must , in short , pay you a good round sum for damages , if it goes on -- '' '' Damages ! ''
said Oakly , staring round him at the plum-tree ; `` but I don't know what you mean .
I mean nothing but what 's honest .
I do n't mean to ask for any good round sum ; for the plum-tree has done me no great harm by coming into my garden ; but only I do n't choose it should come there without my leave . ''
`` Well , well , '' said the attorney , `` I understand all that ; but what I want to make you , Mr .
Oakly , understand , is , that this Grant and his son only want to make up matters with you , and prevent the thing 's coming to a fair trial , by sending on , in this underhand sort of way , a bribe of a few raspberries . ''
`` A bribe ! ''
exclaimed Oakly , `` I never took a bribe , and I never will '' ; and , with sudden indignation , he pulled the raspberry plants from the ground in which Arthur was planting them ; and he threw them over the wall into Grant 's garden .
Maurice had put his tulip , which was beginning to blow , in a flower-pot , on the top of the wall , in hopes that his friend Arthur would see it from day to day .
Alas !
he knew not in what a dangerous situation he had placed it .
One of his own Brobdingnag raspberry-plants , swung by the angry arm of Oakly , struck off the head of his precious tulip !
Arthur , who was full of the thought of convincing his father that the attorney was mistaken in his judgment of poor Maurice , did not observe the fall of the tulip .
The next day , when Maurice saw his raspberry-plants scattered upon the ground , and his favourite tulip broken , he was in much astonishment , and , for some moments , angry ; but anger , with him , never lasted long .
He was convinced that all this must be owing to some accident or mistake .
He could not believe that anyone could be so malicious as to injure him on purpose -- '' And even if they did all this on purpose to vex me , '' said he to himself , `` the best thing I can do , is , not to let it vex me .
Forgive and forget . ''
This temper of mind Maurice was more happy in enjoying than he could have been made , without it , by the possession of all the tulips in Holland .
Tulips were , at this time , things of great consequence in the estimation of the country several miles round where Maurice and Arthur lived .
There was a florist 's feast to be held at the neighbouring town , at which a prize of a handsome set of gardening-tools was to be given to the person who could produce the finest flower of its kind .
A tulip was the flower which was thought the finest the preceding year , and consequently numbers of people afterwards endeavoured to procure tulip-roots , in hopes of obtaining the prize this year .
Arthur 's tulip was beautiful .
As he examined it from day to day , and every day thought it improving , he longed to thank his friend Maurice for it ; and he often mounted into his crab-tree , to look into Maurice 's garden , in hopes of seeing his tulip also in full bloom and beauty .
He never could see it .
The day of the florist 's feast arrived , and Oakly went with his son and the fine tulip to the place of meeting .
It was on a spacious bowling- green .
All the flowers of various sorts were ranged upon a terrace at the upper end of the bowling-green ; and , amongst all this gay variety , the tulip which Maurice had given to Arthur appeared conspicuously beautiful .
To the owner of this tulip the prize was adjudged ; and , as the handsome garden-tools were delivered to Arthur , he heard a well known voice wish him joy .
He turned , looked about him , and saw his friend Maurice .
`` But , Maurice , where is your own tulip ? ''
said Mr .
Oakly ; `` I thought , Arthur , you told me that he kept one for himself . ''
`` So I did , '' said Maurice ; `` but somebody ( I suppose by accident ) broke it . ''
`` Somebody !
who ? ''
cried Arthur and Mr .
Oakly at once .
`` Somebody who threw the raspberry-plants back again over the wall , '' replied Maurice .
`` That was me -- that somebody was me , '' said Oakly .
`` I scorn to deny it ; but I did not intend to break your tulip , Maurice . ''
`` Dear Maurice , '' said Arthur -- '' you know I may call him dear Maurice -- now you are by , papa ; here are all the garden-tools ; take them , and welcome . ''
`` Not one of them , '' said Maurice , drawing back .
`` Offer them to the father -- offer them to Mr .
Grant , '' whispered Oakly ; '' he 'll take them , I 'll answer for it . ''
Mr .
Oakly was mistaken : the father would not accept of the tools .
Mr .
Oakly stood surprised -- '' Certainly , '' said he to himself , `` this can not be such a miser as I took him for '' ; and he walked immediately up to Grant , and bluntly said to him , `` Mr .
Grant , your son has behaved very handsomely to my son ; and you seem to be glad of it . ''
`` To be sure I am , '' said Grant '' Which , '' continued Oakly , `` gives me a better opinion of you than ever I had before -- I mean , than ever I had since the day you sent me the shabby answer about those foolish , what d 'ye call em , cursed raspberries . ''
`` What shabby answer ? ''
said Grant , with surprise ; and Oakly repeated exactly the message which he received ; and Grant declared that he never sent any such message .
He repeated exactly the answer which he really sent , and Oakly immediately stretched out his hand to him , saying `` I believe you : no more need be said .
I 'm only sorry I did not ask you about this four months ago ; and so I should have done if you had not been a Scotchman .
Till now , I never rightly liked a Scotchman .
We may thank this good little fellow , '' continued he , turning to Maurice , `` for our coming at last to a right understanding .
There was no holding out against his good nature .
I 'm sure , from the bottom of my heart , I'm sorry I broke his tulip .
Shake hands , boys ; I 'm glad to see you , Arthur , look so happy again , and hope Mr .
Grant will forgive -- '' '' Oh , forgive and forget , '' said Grant and his son at the same moment .
And from this time forward the two families lived in friendship with each other .
Oakly laughed at his own folly , in having been persuaded to go to law about the plum-tree ; and he , in process of time , so completely conquered his early prejudice against Scotchmen , that he and Grant became partners in business .
Mr .
Grant 's book-LARNING and knowledge of arithmetic he found highly useful to him ; and he , on his side , possessed a great many active , good qualities , which became serviceable to his partner .
The two boys rejoiced in this family union ; and Arthur often declared that they owed all their happiness to Maurice 's favourite maxim , `` Forgive and Forget . ''
WASTE NOT , WANT NOT ; or TWO STRINGS TO YOUR BOW .
Mr .
Gresham , a Bristol merchant , who had , by honourable industry and economy , accumulated a considerable fortune , retired from business to a new house which he had built upon the Downs , near Clifton .
Mr .
Gresham , however , did not imagine that a new house alone could make him happy .
He did not propose to live in idleness and extravagance ; for such a life would have been equally incompatible with his habits and his principles .
He was fond of children ; and as he had no sons , he determined to adopt one of his relations .
He had two nephews , and he invited both of them to his house , that he might have an opportunity of judging of their dispositions , and of the habits which they had acquired .
Hal and Benjamin , Mr .
Gresham 's nephews , were about ten years old .
They had been educated very differently .
Hal was the son of the elder branch of the family .
His father was a gentleman , who spent rather more than he could afford ; and Hal , from the example of the servants in his father's family , with whom he had passed the first years of his childhood , learned to waste more of everything than he used .
He had been told that '' gentlemen should be above being careful and saving '' : and he had unfortunately imbibed a notion that extravagance was the sign of a generous disposition , and economy of an avaricious one .
Benjamin , on the contrary , had been taught habits of care and foresight .
His father had but a very small fortune , and was anxious that his son should early learn that economy ensures independence , and sometimes puts it in the power of those who are not very rich to be very generous .
The morning after these two boys arrived at their uncle 's they were eager to see all the rooms in the house .
Mr .
Gresham accompanied them , and attended to their remarks and exclamations .
`` Oh !
what an excellent motto ! ''
exclaimed Ben , when he read the following words , which were written in large characters over the chimney-piece , in his uncle 's spacious kitchen -- `` WASTE NOT , WANT NOT . ''
`` 'Waste not , want not ! ' ''
repeated his cousin Hal , in rather a contemptuous tone ; `` I think it looks stingy to servants ; and no gentleman 's servants , cooks especially , would like to have such a mean motto always staring them in the face . ''
Ben , who was not so conversant as his cousin in the ways of cooks and gentlemen 's servants , made no reply to these observations .
Mr .
Gresham was called away whilst his nephews were looking at the other rooms in the house .
Some time afterwards , he heard their voices in the hall .
`` Boys , '' said he , `` what are you doing there ? ''
`` Nothing , sir , '' said Hal ; `` you were called away from us and we did not know which way to go . ''
`` And have you nothing to do ? ''
said Mr .
Gresham .
`` No , sir , nothing , '' answered Hal , in a careless tone , like one who was well content with the state of habitual idleness .
`` No , sir , nothing ! ''
replied Ben , in a voice of lamentation .
`` Come , '' said Mr .
Gresham , `` if you have nothing to do , lads , will you unpack those two parcels for me ? ''
The two parcels were exactly alike , both of them well tied up with good whip cord .
Ben took his parcel to a table , and , after breaking off the sealing wax , began carefully to examine the knot , and then to untie it .
Hal stood still , exactly in the spot where the parcel was put into his hands , and tried first at one corner , and then at another , to pull the string off by force .
`` I wish these people would n't tie up their parcels so tight , as if they were never to be undone , '' cried he , as he tugged at the cord ; and he pulled the knot closer instead of loosening it .
`` Ben !
why , how did you get yours undone , man ?
what 's in your parcel ? -- I wonder what is in mine !
I wish I could get this string off -- I must cut it . ''
`` Oh , no , '' said Ben , who now had undone the last knot of his parcel , and who drew out the length of string with exultation , `` do n't cut it , Hal , -- look what a nice cord this is , and yours is the same : it 's a pity to cut it ; 'WASTE NOT , WANT NOT ! '
you know . ''
`` Pooh ! ''
said Hal , `` what signifies a bit of packthread ? ''
`` It is whip cord , '' said Ben .
`` Well , whip cord !
what signifies a bit of whip cord !
you can get a bit of whip cord twice as long as that for twopence ; and who cares for twopence !
Not I , for one !
so here it goes , '' cried Hal , drawing out his knife ; and he cut the cord , precipitately , in sundry places .
`` Lads !
have you undone the parcels for me ? ''
said Mr .
Gresham , opening the parlour door as he spoke .
`` Yes , sir , '' cried Hal ; and he dragged off his half cut , half entangled string -- '' here 's the parcel . ''
`` And here 's my parcel , uncle ; and here's the string , '' said Ben .
`` You may keep the string for your pains , '' said Mr .
Gresham .
`` Thank you , sir , '' said Ben : `` what an excellent whip cord it is ! ''
`` And you , Hal , '' continued Mr .
Gresham , `` you may keep your string too , if it will be of any use to you . ''
`` It will be of no use to me , thank you , sir , '' said Hal .
`` No , I am afraid not , if this be it , '' said his uncle , taking up the jagged knotted remains of Hal 's cord .
A few days after this , Mr .
Gresham gave to each of his nephews a new top .
`` But how 's this ? ''
said Hal ; `` these tops have no strings ; what shall we do for strings ? ''
`` I have a string that will do very well for mine , '' said Ben ; and he pulled out of his pocket the fine , long , smooth string , which had tied up the parcel .
With this he soon set up his top , which spun admirably well .
`` Oh , how I wish I had but a string , '' said Hal .
`` What shall I do for a string ?
I 'll tell you what , I can use the string that goes round my hat ! ''
`` But then , '' said Ben , `` what will you do for a hat-band ? ''
`` I 'll manage to do without one , '' said Hal , and he took the string of his hat for his top .
It soon was worn through , and he split his top by driving the pea too tightly into it .
His cousin Ben let him set up his the next day ; but Hal was not more fortunate or more careful when he meddled with other people 's things than when he managed his own .
He had scarcely played half an hour before he split it , by driving the peg too violently .
Ben bore this misfortune with good humour .
`` Come , '' said he , `` it ca n't be helped ; but give me the string because THAT may still be of use for something else . ''
It happened some time afterwards that a lady , who had been intimately acquainted with Hal 's mother at Bath -- that is to say , who had frequently met her at the card-table during the winter -- now arrived at Clifton .
She was informed by his mother that Hal was at Mr .
Gresham 's , and her sons , who were FRIENDS of his , came to see him , and invited him to spend the next day with them .
Hal joyfully accepted the invitation .
He was always glad to go out to dine , because it gave him something to do , something to think of , or at least something to say .
Besides this , he had been educated to think it was a fine thing to visit fine people ; and Lady Diana Sweepstakes ( for that was the name of his mother 's acquaintance ) was a very fine lady , and her two sons intended to be very great gentlemen .
He was in a prodigious hurry when these young gentlemen knocked at his uncle 's door the next day ; but just as he got to the hall door , little Patty called to him from the top of the stairs , and told him that he had dropped his pocket- handkerchief .
`` Pick it up , then , and bring it to me , quick , ca n't you , child , '' cried Hal , `` for Lady Di 's sons are waiting for me ? ''
Little Patty did not know anything about Lady Di 's sons ; but as she was very good-natured , and saw that her cousin Hal was , for some reason or other , in a desperate hurry , she ran downstairs as fast as she possibly could towards the landing-place , where the handkerchief lay ; but , alas !
before she reached the handkerchief , she fell , rolling down a whole flight of stairs , and when her fall was at last stopped by the landing- place , she did not cry out , she writhed , as if she was in great pain .
`` Where are you hurt , my love ? ''
said Mr .
Gresham , who came instantly , on hearing the noise of someone falling downstairs .
`` Where are you hurt , my dear ? ''
`` Here , papa , '' said the little girl , touching her ankle , which she had decently covered with her gown .
`` I believe I am hurt here , but not much , '' added she , trying to rise ; `` only it hurts me when I move . ''
`` I 'll carry you ; do n't move then , '' said her father , and he took her up in his arms .
`` My shoe !
I 've lost one of my shoes , '' said she .
Ben looked for it upon the stairs , and he found it sticking in a loop of whip cord , which was entangled round one of the bannisters .
When this cord was drawn forth , it appeared that it was the very same jagged , entangled piece which Hal had pulled off his parcel .
He had diverted himself with running up and downstairs , whipping the bannisters with it , as he thought he could convert it to no better use ; and , with his usual carelessness , he at last left it hanging just where he happened to throw it when the dinner bell rang .
Poor little Patty 's ankle was terribly strained , and Hal reproached himself for his folly , and would have reproached himself longer , perhaps , if Lady Di Sweepstakes ' sons had not hurried him away .
In the evening , Patty could not run about as she used to do ; but she sat upon the sofa , and she said , that she did not feel the pain of her ankle SO MUCH , whilst Ben was so good as to play at JACK STRAWS with her .
`` That 's right , Ben ; never be ashamed of being good-natured to those who are younger and weaker than yourself , '' said his uncle , smiling at seeing him produce his whip cord , to indulge his little cousin with a game at her favourite cat 's cradle .
`` I shall not think you one bit less manly , because I see you playing at cat 's cradle with a little child of six years old . ''
Hal , however , was not precisely of his uncle 's opinion : for when he returned in the evening , and saw Ben playing with his little cousin , he could not help smiling contemptuously , and asked if he had been playing at cat 's cradle all night .
In a heedless manner he made some inquiries after Patty 's sprained ankle , and then he ran on to tell all the news he had heard at Lady Diana Sweepstakes ' -- news which he thought would make him appear a person of vast importance .
`` Do you know , uncle -- do you know , Ben , '' said he -- '' there 's to be the most FAMOUS doings that ever were heard of upon the Downs here , the first day of next month , which will be in a fortnight , thank my stars !
I wish the fortnight was over ; I shall think of nothing else , I know , till that happy day comes ! ''
Mr .
Gresham inquired why the first of September was to be so much happier than any other day in the year .
`` Why , '' replied Hal , `` Lady Diana Sweepstakes , you know , is a famous rider , and archer , and ALL THAT -- '' '' Very likely , '' said Mr .
Gresham , soberly ; `` but what then ? ''
`` Dear uncle ! ''
cried Hal , `` but you shall hear .
There 's to be a race upon the Downs on the first of September , and after the race , there 's to be an archery meeting for the ladies , and Lady Diana Sweepstakes is to be one of THEM .
And after the ladies have done shooting -- now , Ben , comes the best part of it !
we boys are to have our turn , and Lady Di is to give a prize to the best marksman amongst us , of a very handsome bow and arrow !
Do you know , I 've been practising already , and I 'll show you , to-morrow , as soon as it comes home , the FAMOUS bow and arrow that Lady Diana has given me ; but , perhaps , '' added he , with a scornful laugh , `` you like a cat 's cradle better than a bow and arrow . ''
Ben made no reply to this taunt at the moment ; but the next day , when Hal 's new bow and arrow came home , he convinced him that he knew how to use it very well .
`` Ben , '' said his uncle , `` you seem to be a good marksman , though you have not boasted of yourself .
I 'll give you a bow and arrow , and , perhaps , if you practise , you may make yourself an archer before the first of September ; and , in the meantime , you will not wish the fortnight to be over , for you will have something to do . ''
`` Oh , sir , '' interrupted Hal , `` but if you mean that Ben should put in for the prize , he must have a uniform . ''
`` Why MUST he ? ''
said Mr .
Gresham .
`` Why , sir , because everybody has -- I mean everybody that 's anybody ; and Lady Diana was talking about the uniform all dinner time , and it's settled , all about it , except the buttons : the young Sweepstakes are to get theirs made first for patterns -- they are to be white , faced with green , and they 'll look very handsome , I 'm sure ; and I shall write to mamma to-night , as Lady Diana bid me , about mine ; and I shall tell her to be sure to answer my letter , without fail , by return of post ; and then , if mamma makes no objection , which I know she wo n't , because she never thinks much about expense , and ALL THAT -- then I shall bespeak my uniform , and get it made by the same tailor that makes for Lady Diana and the young Sweepstakes . ''
`` Mercy upon us ! ''
said Mr .
Gresham , who was almost stunned by the rapid vociferation with which this long speech about a uniform was pronounced .
`` I do n't pretend to understand these things , '' added he , with an air of simplicity ; `` but we will inquire , Ben , into the necessity of the case ; and if it is necessary -- or , if you think it necessary , that you shall have a uniform -- why , I 'll give you one . ''
`` YOU , uncle ?
Will you , INDEED ? ''
exclaimed Hal , with amazement painted in his countenance .
`` Well , that 's the last thing in the world I should have expected !
You are not at all the sort of person I should have thought would care about a uniform ; and now I should have supposed you 'd have thought it extravagant to have a coat on purpose only for one day ; and I 'm sure Lady Diana Sweepstakes thought as I do ; for when I told her of that motto over your kitchen chimney , 'WASTE NOT , WANT NOT , ' she laughed , and said that I had better not talk to you about uniforms , and that my mother was the proper person to write to about my uniform : but I 'll tell Lady Diana , uncle , how good you are , and how much she was mistaken . ''
`` Take care how you do that , '' said Mr .
Gresham : `` for perhaps the lady was not mistaken . ''
`` Nay , did not you say , just now , you would give poor Ben a uniform ? ''
`` I said I would , if he thought it necessary to have one . ''
`` Oh , I 'll answer for it , he 'll think it necessary , `` said Hal , laughing , '' because it is necessary . ''
`` Allow him , at least , to judge for himself , '' said Mr .
Gresham .
`` My dear uncle , but I assure you , '' said Hal , earnestly , `` there 's no judging about the matter , because really , upon my word , Lady Diana said distinctly , that her sons were to have uniforms , white faced with green , and a green and white cockade in their hats . ''
`` May be so , '' said Mr .
Gresham , still with the same look of calm simplicity ; `` put on your hats , boys , and come with me .
I know a gentleman whose sons are to be at this archery meeting , and we will inquire into all the particulars from him .
Then , after we have seen him ( it is not eleven o'clock yet ) we shall have time enough to walk on to Bristol , and choose the cloth for Ben 's uniform , if it is necessary . ''
`` I can not tell what to make of all he says , '' whispered Hal , as he reached down his hat ; `` do you think , Ben , he means to give you this uniform , or not ? ''
`` I think , '' said Ben , `` that he means to give me one , if it is necessary ; or , as he said , if I think it is necessary . ''
`` And that to be sure you will ; wo n't you ?
or else you 'll be a great fool , I know , after all I 've told you .
How can anyone in the world know so much about the matter as I , who have dined with Lady Diana Sweepstakes but yesterday , and heard all about it from beginning to end ?
And as for this gentleman that we are going to , I 'm sure , if he knows anything about the matter , he 'll say exactly the same as I do . ''
`` We shall hear , '' said Ben , with a degree of composure which Hal could by no means comprehend when a uniform was in question .
The gentleman upon whom Mr .
Gresham called had three sons , who were all to be at this archery meeting ; and they unanimously assured him , in the presence of Hal and Ben , that they had never thought of buying uniforms for this grand occasion , and that , amongst the number of their acquaintance , they knew of but three boys whose friends intended to be at such an UNNECESSARY expense .
Hal stood amazed .
`` Such are the varieties of opinion upon all the grand affairs of life , '' said Mr .
Gresham , looking at his nephews .
`` What amongst one set of people you hear asserted to be absolutely necessary , you will hear from another set of people is quite unnecessary .
All that can be done , my dear boys , in these difficult cases , is to judge for yourselves , which opinions , and which people , are the most reasonable . ''
Hal , who had been more accustomed to think of what was fashionable , than of what was reasonable , without at all considering the good sense of what his uncle said to him , replied , with childish petulance , `` Indeed , sir , I do n't know what other people think ; but I only know what Lady Diana Sweepstakes said . ''
The name of Lady Diana Sweepstakes , Hal thought , must impress all present with respect ; he was highly astonished , when , as he looked round , he saw a smile of contempt upon everyone 's countenance : and he was yet further bewildered , when he heard her spoken of as a very silly , extravagant , ridiculous woman , whose opinion no prudent person would ask upon any subject , and whose example was to be shunned , instead of being imitated .
`` Ay , my dear Hal , '' said his uncle , smiling at his look of amazement , '' these are some of the things that young people must learn from experience .
All the world do not agree in opinion about characters : you will hear the same person admired in one company , and blamed in another ; so that we must still come round to the same point , 'Judge for yourself . ' ''
Hal 's thoughts were , however , at present too full of the uniform to allow his judgment to act with perfect impartiality .
As soon as their visit was over , and all the time they walked down the hill from Prince's Building 's towards Bristol , he continued to repeat nearly the same arguments , which he had formerly used , respecting necessity , the uniform , and Lady Diana Sweepstakes .
To all this Mr .
Gresham made no reply , and longer had the young gentleman expatiated upon the subject , which had so strongly seized upon his imagination , had not his senses been forcibly assailed at this instant by the delicious odours and tempting sight of certain cakes and jellies in a pastrycook 's shop .
`` Oh , uncle , '' said he , as his uncle was going to turn the corner to pursue the road to Bristol , '' look at those jellies ! ''
pointing to a confectioner 's shop .
`` I must buy some of those good things , for I have got some halfpence in my pocket . ''
`` Your having halfpence in your pocket is an excellent reason for eating , '' said Mr .
Gresham , smiling .
`` But I really am hungry , '' said Hal ; `` you know , uncle , it is a good while since breakfast . ''
His uncle , who was desirous to see his nephews act without restraint , that he might judge their characters , bid them do as they pleased .
`` Come , then , Ben , if you 've any halfpence in your pocket . ''
`` I 'm not hungry , '' said Ben .
`` I suppose THAT means that you 've no halfpence , '' said Hal , laughing , with the look of superiority which he had been taught to think the RICH might assume towards those who were convicted either of poverty or economy .
`` Waste not , want not , '' said Ben to himself .
Contrary to his cousin's surmise , he happened to have two pennyworth of halfpence actually in his pocket .
At the very moment Hal stepped into the pastrycook 's shop , a poor , industrious man , with a wooden leg , who usually sweeps the dirty corner of the walk which turns at this spot to the Wells , held his hat to Ben , who , after glancing his eye at the petitioner 's well worn broom , instantly produced his twopence .
`` I wish I had more halfpence for you , my good man , '' said he ; `` but I 've only twopence . ''
Hal came out of Mr .
Millar 's , the confectioner 's shop , with a hatful of cakes in his hand .
Mr .
Millar 's dog was sitting on the flags before the door , and he looked up with a wistful , begging eye at Hal , who was eating a queen cake .
Hal , who was wasteful even in his good-nature , threw a whole queen cake to the dog , who swallowed it for a single mouthful .
`` There goes twopence in the form of a queen cake , '' said Mr .
Gresham .
Hal next offered some of his cakes to his uncle and cousin ; but they thanked him , and refused to eat any , because , they said , they were not hungry ; so he ate and ate as he walked along , till at last he stopped , and said , `` This bun tastes so bad after the queen cakes , I ca n't bear it ! ''
and he was going to fling it from him into the river .
`` Oh , it is a pity to waste that good bun ; we may be glad of it yet , '' said Ben ; `` give it me rather than throw it away . ''
`` Why , I thought you said you were not hungry , '' said Hal .
`` True , I am not hungry now ; but that is no reason why I should never be hungry again . ''
`` Well , there is the cake for you .
Take it ; for it has made me sick , and I do n't care what becomes of it . ''
Ben folded the refuse bit of his cousin 's bun in a piece of paper , and put it into his pocket .
`` I 'm beginning to be exceeding tired or sick or something , '' said Hal ; '' and as there is a stand of coaches somewhere hereabouts , had not we better take a coach , instead of walking all the way to Bristol ? ''
`` For a stout archer , '' said Mr .
Gresham , `` you are more easily tired than one might have expected .
However , with all my heart , let us take a coach , for Ben asked me to show him the cathedral yesterday ; and I believe I should find it rather too much for me to walk so far , though I am not sick with eating good things . ''
`` THE CATHEDRAL ! ''
said Hal , after he had been seated in the coach about a quarter of an hour , and had somewhat recovered from his sickness -- '' the cathedral !
Why , are we only going to Bristol to see the cathedral ?
I thought we came out to see about a uniform . ''
There was a dulness and melancholy kind of stupidity in Hal 's countenance as he pronounced these words , like one wakening from a dream , which made both his uncle and his cousin burst out a-laughing .
`` Why , '' said Hal , who was now piqued , `` I 'm sure you did say , uncle , you would go to Mr .
Hall 's to choose the cloth for the uniform . ''
`` Very true , and so I will , '' said Mr .
Gresham ; `` but we need not make a whole morning 's work , need we , of looking at a piece of cloth ?
Can not we see a uniform and a cathedral both in one morning ? ''
They went first to the cathedral .
Hal 's head was too full of the uniform to take any notice of the painted window , which immediately caught Ben's embarrassed attention .
He looked at the large stained figures on the Gothic window , and he observed their coloured shadows on the floor and walls .
Mr .
Gresham , who perceived that he was eager on all subjects to gain information , took this opportunity of telling him several things about the lost art of painting on glass , Gothic arches , etc. , which Hal thought extremely tiresome .
`` Come !
come !
we shall be late indeed , '' said Hal ; `` surely you 've looked long enough , Ben , at this blue and red window . ''
`` I 'm only thinking about these coloured shadows , '' said Ben .
`` I can show you when we go home , Ben , '' said his uncle , `` an entertaining paper upon such shadows .
`` * * Vide `` Priestley 's History of Vision , '' chapter on coloured shadows .
`` Hark ! ''
cried Ben , `` did you hear that noise ? ''
They all listened ; and they heard a bird singing in the cathedral .
`` It 's our old robin , sir , '' said the lad who had opened the cathedral door for them .
`` Yes , '' said Mr .
Gresham , `` there he is , boys -- look -- perched upon the organ ; he often sits there , and sings , whilst the organ is playing . ''
`` And , '' continued the lad who showed the cathedral , `` he has lived here these many , many winters .
They say he is fifteen years old ; and he is so tame , poor fellow !
that if I had a bit of bread he 'd come down and feed in my hand . ''
`` I 've a bit of bun here , '' cried Ben , joyfully , producing the remains of the bun which Hal but an hour before would have thrown away .
`` Pray , let us see the poor robin eat out of your hand . ''
The lad crumbled the bun , and called to the robin , who fluttered and chirped , and seemed rejoiced at the sight of the bread ; but yet he did not come down from his pinnacle on the organ .
`` He is afraid of US , '' said Ben ; `` he is not used to eat before strangers , I suppose . ''
`` Ah , no , sir , '' said the young man , with a deep sigh , `` that is not the thing .
He is used enough to eat afore company .
Time was he 'd have come down for me before ever so many fine folks , and have eat his crumbs out of my hand , at my first call ; but , poor fellow !
it 's not his fault now .
He does not know me now , sir , since my accident , because of this great black patch . ''
The young man put his hand to his right eye , which was covered with a huge black patch .
Ben asked what ACCIDENT he meant ; and the lad told him that , but a few weeks ago , he had lost the sight of his eye by the stroke of a stone , which reached him as he was passing under the rocks at Clifton unluckily when the workmen were blasting .
`` I don't mind so much for myself , sir , '' said the lad ; `` but I ca n't work so well now , as I used to do before my accident , for my old mother , who has had a STROKE of the palsy ; and I 've a many little brothers and sisters not well able yet to get their own livelihood , though they be as willing as willing can be . ''
`` Where does your mother live ? ''
said Mr .
Gresham .
`` Hard by , sir , just close to the church here : it was HER that always had the showing of it to strangers , till she lost the use of her poor limbs . ''
`` Shall we , may we , uncle , go that way ?
This is the house ; is not it ? ''
said Ben , when they went out of the cathedral .
They went into the house ; it was rather a hovel than a house ; but , poor as it was , it was as neat as misery could make it .
The old woman was sitting up in her wretched bed , winding worsted ; four meagre , ill- clothed , pale children were all busy , some of them sticking pins in paper for the pin-maker , and others sorting rags for the paper-maker .
`` What a horrid place it is ! ''
said Hal , sighing ; `` I did not know there were such shocking places in the world .
I 've often seen terrible- looking , tumble-down places , as we drove through the town in mamma's carriage ; but then I did not know who lived in them ; and I never saw the inside of any of them .
It is very dreadful , indeed , to think that people are forced to live in this way .
I wish mamma would send me some more pocket-money , that I might do something for them .
I had half a crown ; but , '' continued he , feeling in his pockets , `` I 'm afraid I spent the last shilling of it this morning upon those cakes that made me sick .
I wish I had my shilling now , I 'd give it to these poor people . ''
Ben , though he was all this time silent , was as sorry as his talkative cousin for all these poor people .
But there was some difference between the sorrow of these two boys .
Hal , after he was again seated in the hackney-coach , and had rattled through the busy streets of Bristol , for a few minutes quite forgot the spectacle of misery which he had seen ; and the gay shops in Wine Street and the idea of his green and white uniform wholly occupied his imagination .
`` Now for our uniforms ! ''
cried he , as he jumped eagerly out of the coach , when his uncle stopped at the woollen-draper 's door .
`` Uncle , '' said Ben , stopping Mr .
Gresham before he got out of the carriage , `` I do n't think a uniform is at all necessary for me .
I 'm very much obliged to you ; but I would rather not have one .
I have a very good coat , and I think it would be waste . ''
`` Well , let me get out of the carriage , and we will see about it , '' said Mr .
Gresham ; `` perhaps the sight of the beautiful green and white cloth , and the epaulettes ( have you ever considered the epaulettes ? )
may tempt you to change your mind . ''
`` Oh , no , '' said Ben , laughing ; `` I shall not change my mind , '' The green cloth , and the white cloth , and the epaulettes were produced , to Hal 's infinite satisfaction .
His uncle took up a pen , and calculated for a few minutes ; then , showing the back of the letter , upon which he was writing , to his nephews , `` Cast up these sums , boys , '' said he , `` and tell me whether I am right . ''
`` Ben , do you do it , '' said Hal , a little embarrassed ; `` I am not quick at figures . ''
Ben WAS , and he went over his uncle 's calculation very expeditiously .
`` It is right , is it ? ''
said Mr .
Gresham .
`` Yes , sir , quite right . ''
`` Then , by this calculation , I find I could , for less than half the money your uniforms would cost , purchase for each of you boys a warm great- coat , which you will want , I have a notion , this winter upon the Downs . ''
`` Oh , sir , '' said Hal , with an alarmed look ; `` but it is not winter YET ; it is not cold weather YET .
We sha'n't want greatcoats YET . ''
`` Do n't you remember how cold we were , Hal , the day before yesterday , in that sharp wind , when we were flying our kite upon the Downs ?
and winter will come , though it is not come yet -- I am sure , I should like to have a good warm great-coat very much . ''
Mr .
Gresham took six guineas out of his purse and he placed three of them before Hal , and three before Ben .
`` Young gentlemen , '' said he , `` I believe your uniforms would come to about three guineas a piece .
Now I will lay out this money for you just as you please .
Hal , what say you ? ''
`` Why , sir , '' said Hal , `` a great-coat is a good thing , to be sure ; and then , after the great-coat , as you said it would only cost half as much as the uniform , there would be some money to spare , would not there ? ''
`` Yes , my dear , about five-and-twenty shillings . ''
`` Five-and-twenty shillings ? -- I could buy and do a great many things , to be sure , with five-and-twenty shillings ; but then , THE THING IS , I must go without the uniform , if I have the great-coat . ''
`` Certainly , '' said his uncle .
`` Ah ! ''
said Hal , sighing , as he looked at the epaulettes , `` uncle , if you would not be displeased , if I choose the uniform -- '' '' I shall not be displeased at your choosing whatever you like best , '' said Mr .
Gresham .
`` Well , then , thank you , sir , '' said Hal ; `` I think I had better have the uniform , because , if I have not the uniform , now , directly , it will be of no use to me , as the archery meeting is the week after next , you know ; and , as to the great-coat , perhaps between this time and the VERY cold weather , which , perhaps , wo n't be till Christmas , papa will buy a great- coat for me ; and I 'll ask mamma to give me some pocket money to give away , and she will , perhaps . ''
To all this conclusive , conditional reasoning , which depended upon the word PERHAPS , three times repeated , Mr .
Gresham made no reply ; but he immediately bought the uniform for Hal , and desired that it should be sent to Lady Diana Sweepstakes ' son's tailor , to be made up .
The measure of Hal 's happiness was now complete .
`` And how am I to lay out the three guineas for you , Ben ? ''
said Mr .
Gresham ; `` speak , what do you wish for first ? ''
`` A great-coat , uncle , if you please . ''
Gresham bought the coat ; and , after it was paid for , five-and-twenty shillings of Ben 's three guineas remained .
`` What next , my boy ? ''
said his uncle .
`` Arrows , uncle , if you please ; three arrows . ''
`` My dear , I promised you a bow and arrows . ''
`` No , uncle , you only said a bow . ''
`` Well , I meant a bow and arrows .
I 'm glad you are so exact , however .
It is better to claim less than more than what is promised .
The three arrows you shall have .
But go on ; how shall I dispose of these five-and- twenty shillings for you ? ''
`` In clothes , if you will be so good , uncle , for that poor boy who has the great black patch on his eye . ''
`` I always believed , '' said Mr .
Gresham , shaking hands with Ben , `` that economy and generosity were the best friends , instead of being enemies , as some silly , extravagant people would have us think them .
Choose the poor , blind boy 's coat , my dear nephew , and pay for it .
There 's no occasion for my praising you about the matter .
Your best reward is in your own mind , child ; and you want no other , or I 'm mistaken .
Now , jump into the coach , boys , and let 's be off .
We shall be late , I 'm afraid , '' continued he , as the coach drove on : `` but I must let you stop , Ben , with your goods , at the poor boy 's door . ''
When they came to the house , Mr .
Gresham opened the coach door , and Ben jumped out with his parcel under his arm .
`` Stay , stay !
you must take me with you , '' said his pleased uncle ; `` I like to see people made happy , as well as you do . ''
`` And so do I , too , '' said Hal ; `` let me come with you .
I almost wish my uniform was not gone to the tailor 's , so I do . ''
And when he saw the look of delight and gratitude with which the poor boy received the clothes which Ben gave him ; and when he heard the mother and children thank him , he sighed , and said , `` Well , I hope mamma will give me some more pocket money soon . ''
Upon his return home , however , the sight of the FAMOUS bow and arrow , which Lady Diana Sweepstakes had sent him , recalled to his imagination all the joys of his green and white uniform ; and he no longer wished that it had not been sent to the tailor 's .
`` But I do n't understand , Cousin Hal , '' said little Patty , `` why you call this bow a FAMOUS bow .
You say famous very often ; and I do n't know exactly what it means ; a famous uniform -- famous doings .
I remember you said there are to be famous doings , the first of September , upon the Downs .
What does famous mean ? ''
`` Oh , why , famous means -- now , do n't you know what famous means ?
It means- -it is a word that people say -- it is the fashion to say it -- it means -- it means famous . ''
Patty laughed , and said , `` This does not explain it to me . ''
`` No , '' said Hal , `` nor can it be explained : if you do n't understand it , that 's not my fault .
Everybody but little children , I suppose , understands it ; but there 's no explaining THOSE SORT of words , if you do n't TAKE THEM at once .
There 's to be famous doings upon the Downs , the first of September ; that is grand , fine .
In short , what does it signify talking any longer , Patty , about the matter ?
Give me my bow , for I must go out upon the Downs and practise . ''
Ben accompanied him with the bow and the three arrows which his uncle had now given to him ; and , every day , these two boys went out upon the Downs and practised shooting with indefatigable perseverance .
Where equal pains are taken , success is usually found to be pretty nearly equal .
Our two archers , by constant practice , became expert marksmen ; and before the day of trial , they were so exactly matched in point of dexterity , that it was scarcely possible to decide which was superior .
The long expected lst of September at length arrived .
`` What sort of a day is it ? ''
was the first question that was asked by Hal and Ben the moment that they wakened .
The sun shone bright , but there was a sharp and high wind .
`` Ha ! ''
said Ben , `` I shall be glad of my good great-coat to-day ; for I 've a notion it will be rather cold upon the Downs , especially when we are standing still , as we must , whilst all the people are shooting . ''
`` Oh , never mind !
I do n't think I shall feel it cold at all , '' said Hal , as he dressed himself in his new green and white uniform ; and he viewed himself with much complacency .
`` Good morning to you , uncle ; how do you do ? ''
said he , in a voice of exultation , when he entered the breakfast-room .
How do you do ?
seemed rather to mean , `` How do you like me in my uniform ? ''
And his uncle's cool , `` Very well , I thank you , Hal , '' disappointed him , as it seemed only to say , `` Your uniform makes no difference in my opinion of you . ''
Even little Patty went on eating her breakfast much as usual , and talked of the pleasure of walking with her father to the Downs , and of all the little things which interested her ; so that Hal 's epaulettes were not the principal object in anyone 's imagination but his own .
`` Papa , '' said Patty , `` as we go up the hill where there is so much red mud , I must take care to pick my way nicely ; and I must hold up my frock , as you desired me , and , perhaps , you will be so good , if I am not troublesome , to lift me over the very bad place where are no stepping- stones .
My ankle is entirely well , and I 'm glad of that , or else I should not be able to walk so far as the Downs .
How good you were to me , Ben , when I was in pain the day I sprained my ankle !
You played at jack straws and at cat's-cradle with me .
Oh , that puts me in mind -- here are your gloves which I asked you that night to let me mend .
I 've been a great while about them ; but are not they not very neatly mended , papa ?
Look at the sewing . ''
`` I am not a very good judge of sewing , my dear little girl , '' said Mr .
Gresham , examining the work with a close and scrupulous eye ; `` but , in my opinion , here is one stitch that is rather too long .
The white teeth are not quite even . ''
`` Oh , papa , I 'll take out that long tooth in a minute , '' said Patty , laughing ; `` I did not think that you would observe it so soon . ''
`` I would not have you trust to my blindness , '' said her father , stroking her head , fondly ; `` I observe everything .
I observe , for instance , that you are a grateful little girl , and that you are glad to be of use to those who have been kind to you ; and for this I forgive you the long stitch . ''
`` But it 's out , it 's out , papa , '' said Patty ; `` and the next time your gloves want mending , Ben , I 'll mend them better . ''
`` They are very nice , I think , '' said Ben , drawing them on ; `` and I am much obliged to you .
I was just wishing I had a pair of gloves to keep my fingers warm to-day , for I never can shoot well when my hands are benumbed .
Look , Hal ; you know how ragged these gloves were ; you said they were good for nothing but to throw away ; now look , there 's not a hole in them , '' said he , spreading his fingers .
`` Now , is it not very extraordinary , '' said Hal to himself , `` that they should go on so long talking about an old pair of gloves , without saying scarcely a word about my new uniform ?
Well , the young Sweepstakes and Lady Diana will talk enough about it ; that 's one comfort .
Is not it time to think of setting out , sir ? ''
said Hal to his uncle .
`` The company , you know , are to meet at the Ostrich at twelve , and the race to begin at one , and Lady Diana 's horses , I know were ordered to be at the door at ten . ''
Mr .
Stephen , the butler , here interrupted the hurrying young gentleman in his calculations .
`` There 's a poor lad , sir , below , with a great black patch on his right eye , who is come from Bristol , and wants to speak a word with the young gentlemen , if you please .
I told him they were just going out with you ; but he says he wo n't detain them more than half a minute . ''
`` Show him up , show him up , '' said Mr .
Gresham .
`` But , I suppose , '' said Hal , with a sigh , `` that Stephen mistook , when he said the young GENTLEMEN ; he only wants to see Ben , I daresay ; I 'm sure he has no reason to want to see me . ''
`` Here he comes -- Oh , Ben , he is dressed in the new coat you gave him , '' whispered Hal , who was really a good-natured boy , though extravagant .
`` How much better he looks than he did in the ragged coat !
Ah !
he looked at you first , Ben -- and well he may ! ''
The boy bowed , without any cringing servility , but with an open , decent freedom in his manner , which expressed that he had been obliged , but that he knew his young benefactor was not thinking of the obligation .
He made as little distinction as possible between his bows to the two cousins .
`` As I was sent with a message , by the clerk of our parish , to Redland chapel out on the Downs , to-day , sir , '' said he to Mr .
Gresham , `` knowing your house lay in my way , my mother , sir , bid me call , and make bold to offer the young gentlemen two little worsted balls that she has worked for them , '' continued the lad , pulling out of his pocket two worsted balls worked in green and orange-coloured stripes .
`` They are but poor things , sir , she bid me say , to look at ; but , considering she has but one hand to work with , and that her left hand , you 'll not despise 'em , we hopes . ''
He held the balls to Ben and Hal .
`` They are both alike , gentlemen , '' said he .
`` If you 'll be pleased to take 'em they 're better than they look , for they bound higher than your head .
I cut the cork round for the inside myself , which was all I could do . ''
`` They are nice balls , indeed : we are much obliged to you , '' said the boys as they received them , and they proved them immediately .
The balls struck the floor with a delightful sound , and rebounded higher than Mr .
Gresham 's head .
Little Patty clapped her hands joyfully .
But now a thundering double rap at the door was heard .
`` The Master Sweepstakes , sir , '' said Stephen , `` are come for Master Hal .
They say that all the young gentlemen who have archery uniforms are to walk together , in a body , I think they say , sir ; and they are to parade along the Well Walk , they desired me to say , sir , with a drum and fife , and so up the hill by Prince 's Place , and all to go upon the Downs together , to the place of meeting .
I am not sure I 'm right , sir ; for both the young gentlemen spoke at once , and the wind is very high at the street door ; so that I could not well make out all they said ; but I believe this is the sense of it . ''
`` Yes , yes , '' said Hal , eagerly , `` it 's all right .
I know that is just what was settled the day I dined at Lady Diana 's ; and Lady Diana and a great party of gentlemen are to ride -- '' '' Well , that is nothing to the purpose , '' interrupted Mr .
Gresham .
`` Don't keep these Master Sweepstakes waiting .
Decide -- do you choose to go with them or with us ? ''
`` Sir -- uncle -- sir , you know , since all the UNIFORMS agreed to go together- - '' '' Off with you , then , Mr .
Uniform , if you mean to go , '' said Mr .
Gresham .
Hal ran downstairs in such a hurry that he forgot his bow and arrows .
Ben discovered this when he went to fetch his own ; and the lad from Bristol , who had been ordered by Mr .
Gresham to eat his breakfast before he proceeded to Redland Chapel , heard Ben talking about his cousin 's bow and arrows .
`` I know , '' said Ben , `` he will be sorry not to have his bow with him , because here are the green knots tied to it , to match his cockade : and he said that the boys were all to carry their bows , as part of the show . ''
`` If you 'll give me leave , sir , '' said the poor Bristol lad , `` I shall have plenty of time ; and I 'll run down to the Well Walk after the young gentleman , and take him his bow and arrows . ''
`` Will you ?
I shall be much obliged to you , '' said Ben ; and away went the boy with the bow that was ornamented with green ribands .
The public walk leading to the Wells was full of company .
The windows of all the houses in St .
Vincent 's Parade were crowded with well dressed ladies , who were looking out in expectation of the archery procession .
Parties of gentlemen and ladies , and a motley crowd of spectators , were seen moving backwards and forwards , under the rocks , on the opposite side of the water .
A barge , with coloured streamers flying , was waiting to take up a party who were going upon the water .
The bargemen rested upon their oars , and gazed with broad faces of curiosity upon the busy scene that appeared upon the public walk .
The archers and archeresses were now drawn up on the flags under the semicircular piazza just before Mrs .
Yearsley 's library .
A little band of children , who had been mustered by Lady Diana Sweepstakes ' SPIRITED EXERTIONS , closed the procession .
They were now all in readiness .
The drummer only waited for her ladyship 's signal ; and the archers ' corps only waited for her ladyship 's word of command to march .
`` Where are your bow and arrows , my little man ? ''
said her ladyship to Hal , as she reviewed her Lilliputian regiment .
`` You ca n't march , man , without your arms ? ''
Hal had despatched a messenger for his forgotten bow , but the messenger returned not .
He looked from side to side in great distress -- '' Oh , there 's my bow coming , I declare ! ''
cried he ; `` look , I see the bow and the ribands .
Look now , between the trees , Charles Sweepstakes , on the Hotwell Walk ; it is coming ! ''
`` But you 've kept us all waiting a confounded time , '' said his impatient friend .
`` It is that good-natured poor fellow from Bristol , I protest , that has brought it me ; I 'm sure I do n't deserve it from him , '' said Hal , to himself , when he saw the lad with the black patch on his eye running , quite out of breath , towards him , with his bow and arrows .
`` Fall back , my good friend -- fall back , '' said the military lady , as soon as he had delivered the bow to Hal ; `` I mean , stand out of the way , for your great patch cuts no figure amongst us .
Do n't follow so close , now , as if you belonged to us , pray . ''
The poor boy had no ambition to partake the triumph ; he FELL BACK as soon as he understood the meaning of the lady 's words .
The drum beat , the fife played , the archers marched , the spectators admired .
Hal stepped proudly , and felt as if the eyes of the whole universe were upon his epaulettes , or upon the facings of his uniform ; whilst all the time he was considered only as part of a show .
The walk appeared much shorter than usual , and he was extremely sorry that Lady Diana , when they were half-way up the hill leading to Prince's Place , mounted her horse , because the road was dirty , and all the gentlemen and ladies who accompanied her followed her example .
`` We can leave the children to walk , you know , '' said she to the gentleman who helped her to mount her horse .
`` I must call to some of them , though , and leave orders where they are to join . ''
She beckoned : and Hal , who was foremost , and proud to show his alacrity , ran on to receive her ladyship 's orders .
Now , as we have before observed , it was a sharp and windy day ; and though Lady Diana Sweepstakes was actually speaking to him , and looking at him , he could not prevent his nose from wanting to be blowed : he pulled out his handkerchief and out rolled the new ball which had been given to him just before he left home , and which , according to his usual careless habits , he had stuffed into his pockets in his hurry .
`` Oh , my new ball ! ''
cried he , as he ran after it .
As he stopped to pick it up , he let go his hat , which he had hitherto held on with anxious care ; for the hat , though it had a fine green and white cockade , had no band or string round it .
The string , as we may recollect , our wasteful hero had used in spinning his top .
The hat was too large for his head without this band ; a sudden gust of wind blew it off .
Lady Diana 's horse started and reared .
She was a FAMOUS horse woman , and sat him to the admiration of all beholders ; but there was a puddle of red clay and water in this spot , and her ladyship's uniform habit was a sufferer by the accident .
`` Careless brat ! ''
said she , '' why ca n't he keep his hat upon his head ? ''
In the meantime , the wind blew the hat down the hill , and Hal ran after it amidst the laughter of his kind friends , the young Sweepstakes , and the rest of the little regiment .
The hat was lodged , at length , upon a bank .
Hal pursued it : he thought this bank was hard , but , alas !
the moment he set his foot upon it the foot sank .
He tried to draw it back ; his other foot slipped , and he fell prostrate , in his green and white uniform , into the treacherous bed of red mud .
His companions , who had halted upon the top of the hill , stood laughing , spectators of his misfortune .
It happened that the poor boy with the black patch upon his eye , who had been ordered by Lady Diana to `` fall back '' and to `` keep at a distance , '' was now coming up the hill ; and the moment he saw our fallen hero , he hastened to his assistance .
He dragged poor Hal , who was a deplorable spectacle , out of the red mud .
The obliging mistress of a lodging house , as soon as she understood that the young gentleman was nephew to Mr .
Gresham , to whom she had formerly let her house , received Hal , covered as he was with dirt .
The poor Bristol lad hastened to Mr .
Gresham 's for clean stockings and shoes for Hal .
He was unwilling to give up his uniform : it was rubbed and rubbed , and a spot here and there was washed out ; and he kept continually repeating , -- '' When it 's dry it will all brush off -- when it's dry it will all brush off , wo n't it ? ''
But soon the fear of being too late at the archery meeting began to balance the dread of appearing in his stained habiliments ; and he now as anxiously repeated , whilst the woman held the wet coat to the fire , `` Oh , I shall be too late ; indeed , I shall be too late ; make haste ; it will never dry ; hold it nearer -- nearer to the fire .
I shall lose my turn to shoot ; oh , give me the coat ; I do n't mind how it is , if I can but get it on . ''
Holding it nearer and nearer to the fire dried it quickly , to be sure ; but it shrunk it also , so that it was no easy matter to get the coat on again .
However , Hal , who did not see the red splashes , which , in spite of all these operations , were too visible upon his shoulders , and upon the skirts of his white coat behind , was pretty well satisfied to observe that there was not one spot upon the facings .
`` Nobody , '' said he , `` will take notice of my coat behind , I daresay .
I think it looks as smart almost as ever ! ''
-- and under this persuasion our young archer resumed his bow -- his bow with green ribands , now no more ! -- and he pursued his way to the Downs .
All his companions were far out of sight .
`` I suppose , '' said he to his friend with the black patch -- '' I suppose my uncle and Ben had left home before you went for the shoes and stockings for me ? ''
`` Oh , yes , sir ; the butler said they had been gone to the Downs a matter of a good half-hour or more . ''
Hal trudged on as fast as he possibly could .
When he got upon the Downs , he saw numbers of carriages , and crowds of people , all going towards the place of meeting at the Ostrich .
He pressed forwards .
He was at first so much afraid of being late , that he did not take notice of the mirth his motley appearance excited in all beholders .
At length he reached the appointed spot .
There was a great crowd of people .
In the midst he heard Lady Diana 's loud voice betting upon someone who was just going to shoot at the mark .
`` So then the shooting is begun , is it ? ''
said Hal .
`` Oh , let me in !
pray let me into the circle !
I 'm one of the archers -- I am , indeed ; do n't you see my green and white uniform ? ''
`` Your red and white uniform , you mean , '' said the man to whom he addressed himself ; and the people , as they opened a passage for him , could not refrain laughing at the mixture of dirt and finery which it exhibited .
In vain , when he got into the midst of the formidable circle , he looked to his friends , the young Sweepstakes , for their countenance and support .
They were amongst the most unmerciful of the laughers .
Lady Diana also seemed more to enjoy than to pity his confusion .
`` Why could you not keep your hat upon your head , man ? ''
said she , in her masculine tone .
`` You have been almost the ruin of my poor uniform habit ; but I 've escaped rather better than you have .
Do n't stand there , in the middle of the circle , or you 'll have an arrow in your eyes just now , I've a notion . ''
Hal looked round in search of better friends .
`` Oh , where 's my uncle ? -- where 's Ben ? ''
said he .
He was in such confusion , that , amongst the number of faces , he could scarcely distinguish one from another ; but he felt somebody at this moment pull his elbow , and , to his great relief , he heard the friendly voice , and saw the good natured face of his Cousin Ben .
`` Come back ; come behind these people , '' said Ben , `` and put on my great- coat ; here it is for you . ''
Right glad was Hal to cover his disgraced uniform with the rough great- coat which he had formerly despised .
He pulled the stained , drooping cockade out of his unfortunate hat ; and he was now sufficiently recovered from his vexation to give an intelligible account of his accident to his uncle and Patty , who anxiously inquired what had detained him so long , and what had been the matter .
In the midst of the history of his disaster , he was just proving to Patty that his taking the hatband to spin his top had nothing to do with his misfortune , and he was at the same time endeavouring to refute his uncle 's opinion that the waste of the whipcord that tied the parcel was the original cause of all his evils , when he was summoned to try his skill with his FAMOUS bow .
`` My hands are benumbed ; I can scarcely feel , '' said he , rubbing them , and blowing upon the ends of his fingers .
`` Come , come , '' cried young Sweepstakes , `` I 'm within one inch of the mark ; who 'll go nearer ?
I shall like to see .
Shoot away , Hal ; but first understand our laws ; we settled them before you came upon the green .
You are to have three shots , with your own bow and your own arrows ; and nobody 's to borrow or lend under pretence of other 's bows being better or worse , or under any pretence .
Do you hear , Hal ? ''
This young gentleman had good reasons for being so strict in these laws , as he had observed that none of his companions had such an excellent bow as he had provided for himself .
Some of the boys had forgotten to bring more than one arrow with them , and by his cunning regulation that each person should shoot with their own arrows , many had lost one or two of their shots .
`` You are a lucky fellow ; you have your three arrows , '' said young Sweepstakes .
`` Come , we ca n't wait whilst you rub your fingers , man -- shoot away . ''
Hal was rather surprised at the asperity with which his friend spoke .
He little knew how easily acquaintance who call themselves friends can change when their interest comes in the slightest degree in competition with their friendship .
Hurried by his impatient rival , and with his hands so much benumbed that he could scarcely feel how to fix the arrow in the string , he drew the bow .
The arrow was within a quarter of an inch of Master Sweepstakes ' mark , which was the nearest that had yet been hit .
Hal seized his second arrow .
`` If I have any luck -- '' said he .
But just as he pronounced the word LUCK , and as he bent his bow , the string broke in two , and the bow fell from his hands .
`` There , it 's all over with you ! ''
cried Master Sweepstakes , with a triumphant laugh .
`` Here 's my bow for him , and welcome , '' said Ben .
`` No , no , sir , '' said Master Sweepstakes , `` that is not fair ; that 's against the regulation .
You may shoot with your own bow , if you choose it , or you may not , just as you think proper ; but you must not lend it , sir . ''
It was now Ben 's turn to make his trial .
His first arrow was not successful .
His second was exactly as near as Hal 's first .
`` You have but one more , '' said Master Sweepstakes -- '' now for it ! ''
Ben , before he ventured his last arrow , prudently examined the string of his bow ; and , as he pulled it to try its strength , it cracked .
Master Sweepstakes clapped his hands with loud exultations and insulting laughter .
But his laughter ceased when our provident hero calmly drew from his pocket an excellent piece of whip cord .
`` The everlasting whip cord , I declare ! ''
exclaimed Hal , when he saw that it was the very same that had tied up the parcel .
`` Yes , '' said Ben , as he fastened it to his bow , `` I put it into my pocket , to-day , on purpose , because I thought I might happen to want it . ''
He drew his bow the third and last time .
`` Oh , papa ! ''
cried little Patty , as his arrow hit the mark , `` it 's the nearest ; is it not the nearest ? ''
Master Sweepstakes , with anxiety , examined the hit .
There could be no doubt .
Ben was victorious !
The bow , the prize bow , was now delivered to him ; and Hal , as he looked at the whip-cord exclaimed , `` How LUCKY this whip-cord has been to you , Ben ! ''
`` It is LUCKY , perhaps you mean , that he took care of it , '' said Mr .
Gresham .
`` Ay , '' said Hal , `` very true ; he might well say , 'Waste not , want not . '
It is a good thing to have two strings to one 's bow . ''
OLD POZ .
LUCY , daughter to the Justice .
MRS .
BUSTLE , landlady of the `` Saracen 's Head . ''
JUSTICE HEADSTRONG .
OLD MAN .
WILLIAM , a Servant .
SCENE I . The House of Justice Headstrong -- a hall -- Lucy watering some myrtles -- A servant behind the scenes is heard to say -- I tell you my master is not up .
You ca n't see him , so go about your business , I say .
Lucy .
To whom are you speaking , William ?
Who 's that ?
Will .
Only an old man , miss , with a complaint for my master .
Lucy .
Oh , then , do n't send him away -- do n't send him away .
Will .
But master has not had his chocolate , ma'am .
He wo n't ever see anybody before he drinks his chocolate , you know , ma'am .
Lucy .
But let the old man , then , come in here .
Perhaps he can wait a little while .
Call him .
( Exit Servant . )
( Lucy sings , and goes on watering her myrtles ; the servant shows in the Old Man . )
Will .
You ca n't see my master this hour ; but miss will let you stay here .
Lucy ( aside ) .
Poor old man !
how he trembles as he walks .
( Aloud . )
Sit down , sit down .
My father will see you soon ; pray sit down .
( He hesitates ; she pushes a chair towards him . )
Lucy .
Pray sit down .
( He sits down . )
Old Man .
You are very good , miss ; very good .
( Lucy goes to her myrtles again . )
Lucy .
Ah !
I 'm afraid this poor myrtle is quite dead -- quite dead .
( The Old Man sighs , and she turns round . )
Lucy ( aside ) .
I wonder what can make him sigh so !
( Aloud . )
My father wo n't make you wait long .
Old M. Oh , ma'am , as long as he pleases .
I 'm in no haste -- no haste .
It 's only a small matter .
Lucy .
But does a small matter make you sigh so ?
Old M. Ah , miss ; because , though it is a small matter in itself , it is not a small matter to me ( sighing again ) ; it was my all , and I 've lost it .
Lucy .
What do you mean ?
What have you lost ?
Old M. Why , miss -- but I wo n't trouble you about it .
Lucy .
But it wo n't trouble me at all -- I mean , I wish to hear it ; so tell it me .
Old M. Why , miss , I slept last night at the inn here , in town -- the '' Saracen 's Head '' -- Lucy ( interrupts him ) .
Hark !
there is my father coming downstairs ; follow me .
You may tell me your story as we go along .
Old M. I slept at the `` Saracen 's Head , '' miss , and -- ( Exit , talking . )
SCENE II .
Justice Headstrong 's Study .
( He appears in his nightgown and cap , with his gouty foot upon a stool -- a table and chocolate beside him -- Lucy is leaning on the arm of his chair . )
Just .
Well , well , my darling , presently ; I 'll see him presently .
Lucy .
Whilst you are drinking your chocolate , papa ?
Just .
No , no , no -- I never see anybody till I have done my chocolate , darling .
( He tastes his chocolate . )
There 's no sugar in this , child .
Lucy .
Yes , indeed , papa .
Just .
No , child -- there 's NO sugar , I tell you ; that poz !
Lucy .
Oh , but , papa , I assure you I put in two lumps myself .
Just .
There 's NO sugar , I say ; why will you contradict me , child , for ever ?
There 's no sugar , I say .
( Lucy leans over him playfully , and with his teaspoon pulls out two lumps of sugar . )
Lucy .
What 's this , papa ?
Just .
Pshaw !
pshaw !
pshaw ! -- it is not melted , child -- it is the same as no sugar ! . -- Oh , my foot , girl , my foot ! -- you kill me .
Go , go , I 'm busy .
I 've business to do .
Go and send William to me ; do you hear , love ?
Lucy .
And the old man , papa ?
Just .
What old man ?
I tell you what , I 've been plagued ever since I was awake , and before I was awake , about that old man .
If he ca n't wait , let him go about his business .
Do n't you know , child , I never see anybody till I 've drunk my chocolate ; and I never will , if it were a duke -- that's poz !
Why , it has but just struck twelve ; if he ca n't wait , he can go about his business , ca n't he ?
Lucy .
Oh , sir , he can wait .
It was not he who was impatient .
( She comes back playfully . )
It was only I , papa ; do n't be angry .
Just .
Well , well , well ( finishing his cup of chocolate , and pushing his dish away ) ; and at anyrate there was not sugar enough .
Send William , send William , child ; and I 'll finish my own business , and then -- ( Exit Lucy , dancing , `` And then ! -- and then ! '' )
JUSTICE , alone .
Just .
Oh , this foot of mine ! -- ( twinges ) -- Oh , this foot !
Ay , if Dr .
Sparerib could cure one of the gout , then , indeed , I should think something of him ; but , as to my leaving off my bottle of port , it's nonsense ; it 's all nonsense ; I ca n't do it ; I ca n't , and wo n't , for all the Dr .
Spareribs in Christendom ; that 's poz !
Enter WILLIAM .
Just .
William -- oh !
ay !
hey !
what answer , pray , did you bring from the '' Saracen 's Head '' ?
Did you see Mrs .
Bustle herself , as I bid you ?
Will .
Yes , sir , I saw the landlady herself ; she said she would come up immediately , sir .
Just .
Ah , that 's well -- immediately ?
Will .
Yes , sir , and I hear her voice below now .
Just .
Oh , show her up ; show Mrs .
Bustle in .
Enter Mrs .
BUSTLE , the landlady of the `` Saracen 's Head . ''
Land .
Good morrow to your worship !
I 'm glad to see your worship look so purely .
I came up with all speed ( taking breath ) .
Our pie is in the oven ; that was what you sent for me about , I take it .
Just .
True ; true ; sit down , good Mrs .
Bustle , pray -- Land .
Oh , your worship 's always very good ( settling her apron ) .
I came up just as I was -- only threw my shawl over me .
I thought your worship would excuse -- I 'm quite , as it were , rejoiced to see your worship look so purely , and to find you up so hearty -- Just .
Oh , I 'm very hearty ( coughing ) , always hearty , and thankful for it .
I hope to see many Christmas doings yet , Mrs .
Bustle .
And so our pie is in the oven , I think you say ?
Land .
In the oven it is .
I put it in with my own hands ; and if we have but good luck in the baking , it will be as pretty a goose-pie -- though I say it that should not say it -- as pretty a goose-pie as ever your worship set your eyes upon .
Just .
Will you take a glass of anything this morning , Mrs .
Bustle ? -- I have some nice usquebaugh .
Land .
Oh , no , your worship ! -- I thank your worship , though , as much as if I took it ; but I just took my luncheon before I came up ; or more proper , MY SANDWICH , I should say , for the fashion 's sake , to be sure .
A LUNCHEON wo n't go down with nobody nowadays ( laughs ) .
I expect hostler and boots will be calling for their sandwiches just now ( laughs again ) .
I 'm sure I beg your worship 's pardon for mentioning a LUNCHEON .
Just .
Oh , Mrs .
Bustle , the word 's a good word , for it means a good thing -- ha !
ha !
ha !
( pulls out his watch ) ; but pray , is it luncheon time .
Why , it 's past one , I declare ; and I thought I was up in remarkably good time , too .
Land .
Well , and to be sure so it was , remarkably good time for your worship ; but folks in our way must be up betimes , you know .
I 've been up and about these seven hours !
Just .
( stretching ) .
Seven hours !
Land .
Ay , indeed -- eight , I might say , for I am an early little body ; though I say it that should not say it -- I AM an early little body .
Just .
An early little body , as you say , Mrs .
Bustle ; so I shall have my goose-pie for dinner , hey ?
Land .
For dinner , as sure as the clock strikes four -- but I must n't stay prating , for it may be spoiling if I 'm away ; so I must wish your worship a good morning .
( She curtsies . )
Just .
No ceremony -- no ceremony ; good Mrs .
Bustle , your servant .
Enter William , to take away the chocolate .
The Landlady is putting on her shawl .
Just .
You may let that man know , William , that I have dispatched my OWN business , and am at leisure for his now ( taking a pinch of snuff ) .
Hum !
pray , William ( Justice leans back gravely ) , what sort of a looking fellow is he , pray ?
Will .
Most like a sort of travelling man , in my opinion , sir -- or something that way , I take it , ( At these words the landlady turns round inquisitively , and delays , that she may listen , while she is putting on and pinning her shawl . )
Just .
Hum !
a sort of a travelling man .
Hum !
lay my books out open at the title Vagrant ; and , William , tell the cook that Mrs .
Bustle promises me the goose-pie for dinner .
Four o'clock , do you hear ?
And show the old man in now .
( The Landlady looks eagerly towards the door , as it opens , and exclaims , ) Land .
My old gentleman , as I hope to breathe !
Enter the OLD MAN .
( Lucy follows the Old Man on tiptoe -- The Justice leans back and looks consequential -- The Landlady sets her arms akimbo -- The Old Man starts as he sees her . )
Just .
What stops you , friend ?
Come forward , if you please .
Land .
( advancing ) .
So , sir , is it you , sir ?
Ay , you little thought , I warrant ye , to meet me here with his worship ; but there you reckoned without your host -- Out of the frying-pan into the fire .
Just .
What is all this ?
What is this ?
Land .
( running on ) .
None of your flummery stuff will go down with his worship no more than with me , I give you warning ; so you may go further and fare worse , and spare your breath to cool your porridge .
Just .
( waves his hand with dignity ) .
Mrs .
Bustle , good Mrs .
Bustle , remember where you are .
Silence !
silence !
Come forward , sir , and let me hear what you have to say .
( The Old Man comes forward . )
Just .
Who and what may you be , friend , and what is your business with me ?
Land .
Sir , if your worship will give me leave -- ( Justice makes a sign to her to be silent ) .
Old M. Please , your worship , I am an old soldier .
Land .
( interrupting ) .
An old hypocrite , say .
Just .
Mrs .
Bustle , pray , I desire , let the man speak .
Old M. For these two years past -- ever since , please your worship -- I was n't able to work any longer ; for in my youth I did work as well as the best of them .
Land .
( eager to interrupt ) .
You work -- you -- Just .
Let him finish his story , I say .
Lucy .
Ay , do , do , papa , speak for him .
Pray , Mrs .
Bustle -- Land .
( turning suddenly round to Lucy ) .
Miss , a good morrow to you , ma'am .
I humbly beg your apologies for not seeing you sooner , Miss Lucy .
( Justice nods to the Old Man , who goes on . )
Old Man .
But please your worship , it pleased God to take away the use of my left arm ; and since that I have never been able to work .
Land .
Flummery !
flummery !
Just .
( angrily ) .
Mrs .
Bustle , I have desired silence , and I will have it , that 's poz !
You shall have your turn presently .
Old M. For these two years past ( for why should I be ashamed to tell the truth ? )
I have lived upon charity , and I scraped together a guinea and a half and upwards , and I was travelling with it to my grandson , in the north , with him to end my days -- but ( sighing ) -- Just .
But what ?
Proceed , pray , to the point .
Old M. But last night I slept here in town , please your worship , at the '' Saracen 's Head . ''
Land .
( in a rage ) .
At the `` Saracen 's Head '' !
Yes , forsooth !
none such ever slept at the `` Saracen 's Head '' afore , or shall afterwards , as long as my name 's Bustle , and the `` Saracen 's Head '' is the `` Saracen 's Head . ''
Just .
Again !
again !
Mrs .
Landlady , this is downright -- I have said you should speak presently .
He SHALL speak first , since I 've said it -- that's poz !
Speak on , friend .
You slept last night at the `` Saracen 's Head . ''
Old M. Yes , please your worship , and I accuse nobody ; but at night I had my little money safe , and in the morning it was gone .
Land .
Gone ! -- gone , indeed , in my house !
and this is the way I 'm to be treated !
Is it so ?
I could n't but speak , your worship , to such an inhuman like , out o ' the way , scandalous charge , if King George and all the Royal Family were sitting in your worship 's chair , beside you , to silence me ( turning to the Old Man ) .
And this is your gratitude , forsooth !
Did n't you tell me that any hole in my house was good enough for you , wheedling hypocrite ?
And the thanks I receive is to call me and mine a pack of thieves .
Old M. Oh , no , no , no , NO -- a pack of thieves , by no means .
Land .
Ay , I thought when _I_ came to speak we should have you upon your marrow-bones in -- Just .
( imperiously ) .
Silence !
Five times have I commanded silence , and five times in vain ; and I wo n't command anything five times in vain -- THAT 'S POZ !
Land .
( in a pet , aside ) .
Old Poz !
( aloud ) .
Then , your worship , I don't see any business I have to be waiting here ; the folks want me at home ( returning and whispering ) .
Shall I send the goose-pie up , your worship , if it 's ready ?
Just .
( with magnanimity ) .
I care not for the goose-pie , Mrs .
Bustle .
Do not talk to me of goose-pies ; this is no place to talk of pies .
Land .
Oh , for that matter , your worship knows best , to be sure .
( Exit Landlady , angry . )
SCENE III .
JUSTICE HEADSTRONG , OLD MAN and LUCY .
Lucy .
Ah , now , I 'm glad he can speak ; now tell papa ; and you need not be afraid to speak to him , for he is very good-natured .
Do n't contradict him , though , because he told ME not .
Just .
Oh , darling , YOU shall contradict me as often as you please -- only not before I 've drunk my chocolate , child -- hey !
Go on , my good friend ; you see what it is to live in Old England , where , thank Heaven , the poorest of His Majesty 's subjects may have justice , and speak his mind before the first in the land .
Now speak on ; and you hear she tells you that you need not be afraid of me .
Speak on .
Old M. I thank your worship , I 'm sure .
Just .
Thank me !
for what , sir ?
I wo n't be thanked for doing justice , sir ; so -- but explain this matter .
You lost your money , hey , at the '' Saracen 's Head '' ?
You had it safe last night , hey ? -- and you missed it this morning ?
Are you sure you had it safe at night ?
Old M. Oh , please your worship , quite sure ; for I took it out and looked at it just before I said my prayers .
Just .
You did -- did ye so ? -- hum !
Pray , my good friend , where might you put your money when you went to bed ?
Old M. Please , your worship , where I always put it -- always -- in my tobacco-box .
Just .
Your tobacco-box !
I never heard of such a thing -- to make a STRONG BOX of a tobacco-box .
Ha !
ha !
ha !
hum ! -- and you say the box and all were gone in the morning ?
Old M. No , please your worship , no ; not the box -- the box was never stirred from the place where I put it .
They left me the box .
Just .
Tut , tut , tut , man ! -- took the money and left the box ?
I 'll never believe THAT !
I 'll never believe that anyone could be such a fool .
Tut , tut !
the thing 's impossible !
It 's well you are not upon oath .
Old M. If I were , please your worship , I should say the same ; for it is the truth .
Just .
Do n't tell me , do n't tell me ; I say the thing is impossible .
Old M. Please , your worship , here 's the box .
Just .
( goes on without looking at it ) .
Nonsense !
nonsense !
it 's no such thing ; it 's no such thing , I say -- no man would take the money and leave the tobacco-box .
I wo n't believe it .
Nothing shall make me believe it ever -- that 's poz .
Lucy ( takes the box , and holds it up before her father 's eyes ) .
You did not see the box , did you , papa !
Just .
Yes , yes , yes , child -- nonsense !
it 's all a lie from beginning to end .
A man who tells one lie will tell a hundred .
All a lie !
all a lie !
Old M. If your worship would give me leave -- Just .
Sir , it does not signify -- it does not signify !
I 've said it , I've said it , and that 's enough to convince me , and I 'll tell you more ; if my Lord Chief Justice of England told it to me , I would not believe it -- that 's poz !
Lucy ( still playing with the box ) .
But how comes the box here , I wonder ?
Just .
Pshaw !
pshaw !
pshaw !
darling .
Go to your dolls , darling , and do n't be positive -- go to your dolls , and do n't talk of what you don't understand .
What can you understand , I want to know , of the law ?
Lucy .
No , papa , I did n't mean about the law , but about the box ; because , if the man had taken it , how could it be here , you know , papa ?
Just .
Hey , hey , what ?
Why , what I say is this , that I do n't dispute that that box , that you hold in your hands , is a box ; nay , for aught I know , it may be a tobacco-box -- but it 's clear to me that if they left the box they did not take the money ; and how do you dare , sir , to come before Justice Headstrong with a lie in your mouth ; recollect yourself -- I'll give you time to recollect yourself .
( A pause . )
Just .
Well , sir ; , and what do you say now about the box ?
Old M. Please , your worship , with submission , I CAN say nothing but what I said before .
Just .
What , contradict me again , after I gave you time to recollect yourself !
I 've done with you ; I have done .
Contradict me as often as you please , but you can not impose upon me ; I defy you to impose upon me !
Old M. Impose !
Just .
I know the law ! -- I know the law ! -- and I 'll make you know it , too .
One hour I 'll give you to recollect yourself , and if you do n't give up this idle story , I 'll -- I 'll commit you as a vagrant -- that 's poz !
Go , go , for the present .
William , take him into the servants ' hall , do you hear ? -- What , take the money and leave the box ?
I 'll never do it -- that's poz !
( Lucy speaks to the Old Man as he is going off . )
Lucy .
Do n't be frightened !
do n't be frightened ! -- I mean , you tell the truth , never be frightened .
Old M. IF I tell the truth -- ( turning up his eyes ) .
( Old Man is still held back by the young lady . )
Lucy .
One moment -- answer me one question -- because of something that just came into my head .
Was the box shut fast when you left it ?
Old M. No , miss , no ! -- open -- it was open ; for I could not find the lid in the dark -- my candle went out .
IF I tell the truth -- oh !
( Exit . )
SCENE IV .
Justice 's Study -- the Justice is writing .
Old M .
Well ! -- I shall have but few days ' more misery in this world !
Just .
( looks up ) .
Why !
why -- why then , why will you be so positive to persist in a lie ?
Take the money and leave the box !
Obstinate blockhead !
Here , William ( showing the committal ) , take this old gentleman to Holdfast , the constable , and give him this warrant .
Enter Lucy , running , out of breath .
Lucy .
I 've found it !
I 've found it !
Here , old man ; here 's your money -- here it is all -- a guinea and a half , and a shilling and a sixpence , just as he said , papa .
Enter LANDLADY .
Land .
Oh la !
your worship , did you ever hear the like ?
Just .
I 've heard nothing yet that I can understand .
First , have you secured the thief , I say ?
Lucy ( makes signs to the landlady to be silent ) .
Yes , yes , yes ! -- we have him safe -- we have him prisoner .
Shall he come in , papa ?
Just .
Yes , child , by all means ; and now I shall hear what possessed him to leave the box .
I do n't understand -- there 's something deep in all this ; I do n't understand it .
Now I do desire , Mrs .
Landlady , nobody may speak a single word whilst I am cross-examining the thief .
( Landlady puts her finger upon her lips -- Everybody looks eagerly towards the door . )
Re-enter Lucy , with a huge wicker cage in her hand , containing a magpie -- The Justice drops the committal out of his hand .
Just .
Hey ! -- what , Mrs .
Landlady -- the old magpie ?
hey ?
Land .
Ay , your worship , my old magpie .
Who 'd have thought it ?
Miss was very clever ; it was she caught the thief .
Miss was very clever .
Old M. Very good !
very good !
Just .
Ay , darling , her father 's own child !
How was it , child ?
Caught the thief , WITH THE MAINOUR , hey ?
Tell us all ; I will hear all -- that's poz !
Lucy .
Oh !
then first I must tell you how I came to suspect Mr .
Magpie .
Do you remember , papa , that day last summer , when I went with you to the bowling-green , at the `` Saracen 's Head '' ?
Land .
Oh , of all days in the year !
but I ask pardon , miss .
Lucy .
Well , that day I heard my uncle and another gentleman telling stories of magpies hiding money ; and they laid a wager about this old magpie and they tried him -- they put a shilling upon the table , and he ran away with it , and hid it ; so I thought that he might do so again , you know , this time .
Just .
Right , right .
It 's a pity , child , you are not upon the Bench ; ha !
ha !
ha !
Lucy .
And when I went to his old hiding place , there it was ; but you see , papa , he did not take the box .
Just .
No , no , no !
because the thief was a magpie .
No MAN would have taken the money and left the box .
You see I was right ; no MAN would have left the box , hey ?
Lucy .
Certainly not , I suppose ; but I 'm so very glad , old man , that you have obtained your money .
Just .
Well then , child , here -- take my purse , and add that to it .
We were a little too hasty with the committal -- hey ?
Land .
Ay , and I fear I was , too ; but when one is touched about the credit of one 's house , one 's apt to speak warmly .
Old M. Oh , I 'm the happiest old man alive !
You are all convinced that I told you no lies .
Say no more -- say no more .
I am the happiest man !
Miss , you have made me the happiest man alive !
Bless you for it !
Land .
Well now , I 'll tell you what .
I know what I think -- you must keep that there magpie , and make a show of him , and I warrant he 'll bring you many an honest penny ; for it 's a TRUE STORY , and folks would like to hear it , I hopes -- Just .
( eagerly ) .
And , friend , do you hear ?
you 'll dine here today , you 'll dine here .
We have some excellent ale .
I will have you drink my health -- that 's poz ! -- hey ?
You 'll drink my health , wo n't you -- hey ?
Old M .
( bows ) .
Oh !
and the young lady 's , if you please .
Just .
Ay , ay , drink her health -- she deserves it .
Ay , drink my darling's health .
Land .
And please your worship , it 's the right time , I believe , to speak of the goose-pie now ; and a charming pie it is , and it 's on the table .
Will .
And Mr .
Smack , the curate , and Squire Solid , and the doctor , sir , are come , and dinner is upon the table .
Just .
Then let us say no more ; but do justice immediately to the goose- pie ; and , darling , put me in mind to tell this story after dinner .
( After they go out , the Justice stops . )
`` Tell this story '' -- I do n't know whether it tells well for me ; but I'll never be positive any more -- THAT 'S POZ !
THE MIMIC .
CHAPTER I. Mr .
and Mrs .
Montague spent the summer of the year 1795 at Clifton with their son Frederick , and their two daughters Sophia and Marianne .
They had taken much care of the education of their children ; nor were they ever tempted , by any motive of personal convenience or temporary amusement , to hazard the permanent happiness of their pupils .
Sensible of the extreme importance of early impressions , and of the powerful influence of external circumstances in forming the characters and the manners , they were now anxious that the variety of new ideas and new objects which would strike the minds of their children should appear in a just point of view .
`` Let children see and judge for themselves , '' is often inconsiderately said .
Where children see only a part they can not judge of the whole ; and from the superficial view which they can have in short visits and desultory conversation , they can form only a false estimate of the objects of human happiness , a false notion of the nature of society , and false opinions of characters .
For the above reasons , Mr .
and Mrs .
Montague were particularly cautious in the choice of their acquaintances , as they were well aware that whatever passed in conversation before children became part of their education .
When they came to Clifton they wished to have a house entirely to themselves , but , as they came late in the season , almost all the lodging houses were full , and for a few weeks they were obliged to remain in a house where some of the apartments were already occupied .
During the first fortnight they scarcely saw or heard anything of one of the families who lodged on the same floor with them .
An elderly quaker , and his sister Bertha , were their silent neighbours .
The blooming complexion of the lady had indeed attracted the attention of the children , as they caught a glimpse of her face when she was getting into her carriage to go out upon the Downs .
They could scarcely believe that she came to the Wells on account of her health .
Besides her blooming complexion , the delicate white of her garments had struck them with admiration ; and they observed that her brother carefully guarded her dress from the wheel of the carriage , as he handed her in .
From this circumstance , and from the benevolent countenance of the old gentleman , they concluded that he was very fond of his sister , and that they were certainly very happy , except that they never spoke , and could be seen only for a moment .
Not so the maiden lady who occupied the ground floor .
On the stairs , in the passages , at her window , she was continually visible ; and she appeared to possess the art of being present in all these places at once .
Her voice was eternally to be heard , and it was not particularly melodious .
The very first day she met Mrs .
Montague 's children on the stairs , she stopped to tell Marianne that she was a charming dear , and a charming little dear ; to kiss her , to inquire her name , and to inform her that her own name was `` Mrs .
Theresa Tattle , '' a circumstance of which there was little danger of their long remaining in ignorance ; for , in the course of one morning , at least twenty single and as many double raps at the door were succeeded by vociferations of `` Mrs .
Theresa Tattle's servant ! ''
`` Mrs .
Theresa Tattle at home ? ''
`` Mrs .
Theresa Tattle not at home ! ''
No person at the Wells was oftener at home and abroad than Mrs .
Tattle .
She had , as she deemed it , the happiness to have a most extensive acquaintance residing at Clifton .
She had for years kept a register of arrivals .
She regularly consulted the subscriptions to the circulating libraries , and the lists at the Ball and the Pump-rooms : so that , with a memory unencumbered with literature , and free from all domestic cares , she contrived to retain a most astonishing and correct list of births , deaths and marriages , together with all the anecdotes , amusing , instructive , or scandalous , which are necessary to the conversation of a water drinking place , and essential to the character of a `` very pleasant woman . ''
`` A very pleasant woman , '' Mrs .
Tattle was usually called ; and , conscious of her accomplishments , she was eager to introduce herself to the acquaintance of her new neighbours ; having , with her ordinary expedition , collected from their servants , by means of her own , all that could be known , or rather , all that could be told about them .
The name of Montague , at all events , she knew was a good name , and justified in courting the acquaintance .
She courted it first by nods , and becks and smiles at Marianne whenever she met her ; and Marianne , who was a very little girl , began presently to nod and smile in return , persuaded that a lady who smiled so much , could not be ill-natured .
Besides , Mrs .
Theresa 's parlour door was sometimes left more than half open , to afford a view of a green parrot .
Marianne sometimes passed very slowly by this door .
One morning it was left quite wide open , when she stopped to say '' Pretty Poll '' ; and immediately Mrs .
Tattle begged she would do her the honour to walk in and see `` Pretty Poll , '' at the same time taking the liberty to offer her a piece of iced plum-cake .
The next day Mrs .
Theresa Tattle did herself the honour to wait upon Mrs .
Montague , `` to apologize for the liberty she taken in inviting Mrs .
Montague 's charming Miss Marianne into her apartment to see Pretty Poll , and for the still greater liberty she had taken in offering her a piece of plum-cake -- inconsiderate creature that she was ! -- which might possibly have disagreed with her , and which certainly were liberties she never should have been induced to take , if she had not been unaccountably bewitched by Miss Marianne 's striking though highly flattering resemblance to a young gentleman ( an officer ) with whom she had danced , now nearly twelve years ago , of the name of Montague , a most respectable young man , and of a most respectable family , with which , in a remote degree , she might presume to say , she herself was someway connected , having the honour to be nearly related to the Joneses of Merionethshire , who were cousins to the Mainwarings of Bedfordshire , who married into the family of the Griffiths , the eldest branch of which , she understood , had the honour to be cousin-german to Mr .
Montague ; on which account she had been impatient to pay a visit , so likely to be productive of most agreeable consequences , by the acquisition of an acquaintance whose society must do her infinite honour . ''
Having thus happily accomplished her first visit , there seemed little probability of escaping Mrs .
Tattle 's further acquaintance .
In the course of the first week she only hinted to Mr .
Montague that `` some people thought his system of education rather odd ; that she should be obliged to him if he would , some time or other , when he had nothing else to do , just sit down and make her understand his notions , that she might have something to say to her acquaintance , as she always wished to have when she heard any friend attacked , or any friend 's opinions . ''
Mr .
Montague declining to sit down and make this lady understand a system of education only to give her something to say , and showing unaccountable indifference about the attacks with which he was threatened , Mrs .
Tattle next addressed herself to Mrs .
Montague , prophesying , in a most serious whisper , `` that the charming Miss Marianne would shortly and inevitably grow quite crooked , if she were not immediately provided with a back- board , a French dancing-master , and a pair of stocks . ''
This alarming whisper could not , however , have a permanent effect upon Mrs .
Montague 's understanding , because three days afterwards Mrs .
Theresa , upon the most anxious inspection , entirely mistook the just and natural proportions of the hip and shoulder .
This danger vanishing , Mrs .
Tattle presently , with a rueful length of face , and formal preface , `` hesitated to assure Mrs .
Montague , that she was greatly distressed about her daughter Sophy ; that she was convinced her lungs were affected ; and that she certainly ought to drink the waters morning and evening ; and above all things , must keep one of the patirosa lozenges constantly in her mouth , and directly consult Dr .
Cardamum , the best physician in the world , and the person she would send for herself upon her death-bed ; because , to her certain knowledge , he had recovered a young lady , a relation of her own , after she had lost one whole GLOBE * of her lungs . ''
* Lobe .
The medical opinion of a lady of so much anatomical precision could not have much weight .
Neither was this universal adviser more successful in an attempt to introduce a tutor to Frederick , who , she apprehended , must want some one to perfect him in the Latin and Greek , and dead languages , of which , she observed , it would be impertinent for a woman to talk ; only she might venture to repeat what she had heard said by good authority , that a competency of the dead tongues could be had nowhere but at a public school , or else from a private tutor who had been abroad ( after the advantage of a classical education , finished in one of the universities ) with a good family ; without which introduction it was idle to think of reaping solid advantages from any continental tour ; all which requisites , from personal knowledge , she could aver to be concentrated in the gentleman she had the honour to recommend , as having been tutor to a young nobleman , who had now no further occasion for him , having , unfortunately for himself and his family , been killed in an untimely duel .
All Mrs .
Theresa Tattle 's suggestions being lost upon these stoical parents , her powers were next tried upon the children , and her success soon became apparent .
On Sophy , indeed , she could not make any impression , though she had expended on her some of her finest strokes of flattery .
Sophy , though very desirous of the approbation of her friends , was not very desirous of winning the favour of strangers .
She was about thirteen -- that dangerous age at which ill educated girls , in their anxiety to display their accomplishments , are apt to become dependent for applause upon the praise of every idle visitor ; when the habits not being formed , and the attention being suddenly turned to dress and manners , girls are apt to affect and imitate , indiscriminately , everything that they conceive to be agreeable .
Sophy , whose taste had been cultivated at the same time with her powers of reasoning , was not liable to fall into these errors .
She found that she could please those whom she wished to please , without affecting to be anything but what she really was ; and her friends listened to what she said , though she never repeated the sentiments , or adopted the phrases , which she might easily have copied from the conversation of those who were older or more fashionable than herself .
This word FASHIONABLE , Mrs .
Theresa Tattle knew , had usually a great effect , even at thirteen ; but she had not observed that it had much power upon Sophy ; nor were her remarks concerning grace and manners much attended to .
Her mother had taught Sophy that it was best to let herself alone , and not to distort either her person or her mind in acquiring grimace , which nothing but the fashion of the moment can support , and which is always detected and despised by people of real good sense and politeness .
`` Bless me ! ''
said Mrs .
Tattle , to herself , `` if I had such a tall daughter , and so unformed , before my eyes from morning to night , it would certainly break my poor heart .
Thank heaven , I am not a mother !
if I were , Miss Marianne for me ! ''
Miss Marianne had heard so often from Mrs .
Tattle that she was very charming , that she could not help believing it ; and from being a very pleasing , unaffected little girl , she in a short time grew so conceited , that she could neither speak , look , nor be silent without imagining that everybody was , or ought to be , looking at her ; and when Mrs .
Theresa saw that Mrs .
Montague looked very grave upon these occasions , she , to repair the ill she had done , would say , after praising Marianne 's hair or her eyes , `` Oh , but little ladies should never think about their beauty , you know .
Nobody loves anybody for being handsome , but for being good . ''
People must think children are very silly , or else they can never have reflected upon the nature of belief in their own minds , if they imagine that children will believe the words that are said to them , by way of moral , when the countenance , manner , and every concomitant circumstance tell them a different tale .
Children are excellent physiognomists -- they quickly learn the universal language of looks ; and what is said OF them always makes a greater impression than what is said TO them , a truth of which those prudent people surely can not be aware who comfort themselves , and apologize to parents , by saying , `` Oh , but I would not say so and so to the child . ''
Mrs .
Theresa had seldom said to Frederick Montague , `` that he had a vast deal of drollery , and was a most incomparable mimic ; '' but she had said so of him in whispers , which magnified the sound to his imagination , if not to his ear .
He was a boy of much vivacity , and had considerable abilities ; but his appetite for vulgar praise had not yet been surfeited .
Even Mrs .
Theresa Tattle 's flattery pleased him , and he exerted himself for her entertainment so much that he became quite a buffoon .
Instead of observing characters and manners , that he might judge of them , and form his own , he now watched every person he saw , that he might detect some foible , or catch some singularity in their gesture or pronunciation , which he might successfully mimic .
Alarmed by the rapid progress of these evils , Mr .
and Mrs .
Montague , who , from the first day that they had been honoured with Mrs .
Tattle 's visit , had begun to look out for new lodgings , were now extremely impatient to decamp .
They were not people who , from the weak fear of offending a silly acquaintance , would hazard the happiness of their family .
They had heard of a house in the country which was likely to suit them , and they determined to go directly to look at it .
As they were to be absent all day , they foresaw that their officious neighbour would probably interfere with their children .
They did not choose to exact any promise from them which they might be tempted to break , and therefore they only said at parting , `` If Mrs .
Theresa Tattle should ask you to come to her , do as you think proper . ''
Scarcely had Mrs .
Montague 's carriage got out of hearing when a note was brought , directed to `` Frederick Montague , Junior , Esq. , '' which he immediately opened , and read as follows : -- '' Mrs .
Theresa Tattle presents her very best compliments to the entertaining Mr .
Frederick Montague ; she hopes he will have the charity to drink tea with her this evening , and bring his charming sister , Miss Marianne , with him , as Mrs .
Theresa will be quite alone with a shocking headache , and is sensible her nerves are affected ; and Dr .
Cardamum says that ( especially in Mrs .
T .
T .
's case ) it is downright death to nervous patients to be alone an instant .
She therefore trusts Mr .
Frederick will not refuse to come and make her laugh .
Mrs .
Theresa has taken care to provide a few macaroons for her little favourite , who said she was particularly fond of them the other day .
Mrs .
Theresa hopes they will all come at six , or before , not forgetting Miss Sophy , if she will condescend to be of the party . ''
At the first reading of this note , `` the entertaining '' Mr .
Frederick , and the `` charming '' Miss Marianne laughed heartily , and looked at Sophy , as if they were afraid that she should think it possible they could like such gross flattery ; but upon a second perusal , Marianne observed that it certainly was very good-natured of Mrs .
Theresa to remember the macaroons ; and Frederick allowed that it was wrong to laugh at the poor woman because she had the headache .
Then twisting the note in his fingers , he appealed to Sophy : -- '' Well , Sophy , leave off drawing for an instant , '' said Frederick , `` and tell us what answer can we send ? ''
`` Can ! -- we can send what answer we please . ''
`` Yes , I know that , '' said Frederick .
`` I would refuse if I could ; but we ought not to do anything rude , should we ?
So I think we might as well go , because we could not refuse , if we would , I say . ''
`` You have made such confusion , '' replied Sophy , `` between 'could n't ' and 'would n't ' and 'should n't , ' that I ca n't understand you ; surely they are all different things . ''
`` Different !
no , '' cried Frederick -- '' could , would , should , might , and ought , are all the same thing in the Latin grammar ; all of 'em signs of the potential mood , you know . ''
Sophy , whose powers of reasoning were not to be confounded , even by quotations from the Latin grammar , looked up soberly from her drawing , and answered `` that very likely those words might be signs of the same thing in the Latin grammar , but she believed that they meant perfectly different things in real life . ''
`` That 's just as people please , '' said her sophistical brother .
`` You know words mean nothing in themselves .
If I choose to call my hat my cadwallader , you would understand me just as well , after I had once explained it to you , that by cadwallader I meant this black thing that I put upon my head ; cadwallader and hat would then be just the same thing to you . ''
`` Then why have two words for the same thing ? ''
said Sophy ; `` and what has this to do with 'could ' and 'should ' ?
You wanted to prove -- '' '' I wanted to prove , '' interrupted Frederick , `` that it 's not worth while to dispute for two hours about two words .
Do keep to the point , Sophy , and do n't dispute with me . ''
`` I was not disputing , I was reasoning . ''
`` Well , reasoning or disputing .
Women have no business to do either ; for , how should they know how to chop logic like men ? ''
At this contemptuous sarcasm upon her sex , Sophy 's colour rose .
`` There ! ''
cried Frederick , exulting , `` now we shall see a philosopheress in a passion ; I 'd give sixpence , half-price , for a harlequin entertainment , to see Sophy in a passion .
Now , Marianne , look at her brush dabbing so fast in the water ! ''
Sophy , who could not easily bear to be laughed at , with some little indignation , said , `` Brother , I wish -- '' '' There !
there ! ''
cried Frederick , pointing to the colour which rose in her cheeks almost to her temples -- '' rising !
rising !
rising !
look at the thermometer !
blood heat !
blood !
fever heat !
boiling water heat !
Marianne . ''
`` Then , '' said Sophy , smiling , `` you should stand a little farther off , both of you .
Leave the thermometer to itself a little while .
Give it time to cool .
It will come down to 'temperate ' by the time you look again . ''
`` Oh , brother ! ''
cried Marianne , `` she 's so good-humoured , do n't tease her any more , and do n't draw heads upon her paper , and do n't stretch her india-rubber , and do n't let us dirty any more of her brushes .
See !
the sides of her tumbler are all manner of colours . ''
`` Oh , I only mixed red , blue , green and yellow , to show you , Marianne , that all colours mixed together make white .
But she is temperate now , and I wo n't plague her ; she shall chop logic , if she likes it , though she is a woman . ''
`` But that 's not fair , brother , '' said Marianne , `` to say 'woman ' in that way .
I 'm sure Sophy found out how to tie that difficult knot , which papa showed us yesterday , long before you did , though you are a man . ''
`` Not long , '' said Frederick .
`` Besides , that was only a conjuring trick . ''
`` It was very ingenious , though , '' said Marianne ; `` and papa said so .
Besides , she understood the 'Rule of Three , ' which was no conjuring trick , better than you did , though she is a woman ; and she can reason , too , mamma says . ''
`` Very well , let her reason away , '' said the provoking wit .
`` All I have to say is , that she 'll never be able to make a pudding . ''
`` Why not , pray , brother ? ''
inquired Sophy , looking up again , very gravely .
`` Why , you know papa himself , the other day at dinner , said that the woman who talks Greek and Latin as well as I do , is a fool after all ; and that she had better have learned something useful ; and Mrs .
Tattle said , she'd answer for it she did not know how to make a pudding . ''
`` Well !
but I am not talking Greek and Latin , am I ? ''
`` No , but you are drawing , and that 's the same thing . ''
`` The same thing !
Oh , Frederick ! ''
said little Marianne , laughing .
`` You may laugh ; but I say it is the same sort of thing .
Women who are always drawing and reasoning , never know how to make puddings .
Mrs .
Theresa Tattle said so , when I showed her Sophy 's beautiful drawing yesterday . ''
`` Mrs .
Theresa Tattle might say so , '' replied Sophy , calmly ; `` but I do not perceive the reason , brother , why drawing should prevent me from learning how to make a pudding . ''
`` Well , I say you 'll never learn how to make a good pudding . ''
`` I have learned , '' continued Sophy , who was mixing her colours , `` to mix such and such colours together to make the colour that I want ; and why should I not be able to learn to mix flour and butter , and sugar and egg , together , to produce the taste that I want . ''
`` Oh , but mixing will never do , unless you know the quantities , like a cook ; and you would never learn the right quantities . ''
`` How did the cook learn them ?
Can not I learn them as she did ? ''
`` Yes , but you 'd never do it exactly , and mind the spoonfuls right , by the recipe , like a cook . ''
`` Indeed !
indeed !
but she would , '' cried Marianne , eagerly : `` and a great deal more exactly , for mamma has taught her to weigh and measure things very carefully : and when I was ill she always weighed the bark in nicely , and dropped my drops so carefully : better than the cook .
When mamma took me down to see the cook make a cake once , I saw her spoonfuls , and her ounces , and her handfuls : she dashed and splashed without minding exactness or the recipe , or anything .
I 'm sure Sophy would make a much better pudding , if exactness only were wanting . ''
`` Well , granting that she could make the best pudding in the whole world , what does that signify ?
I say she never would : so it comes to the same thing . ''
`` Never would !
how can you tell that , brother ? ''
`` Why , now look at her , with her books , and her drawings , and all this apparatus .
Do you think she would ever jump up , with all her nicety , too , and put by all these things , to go down into the greasy kitchen , and plump up to the elbows in suet , like a cook , for a plum-pudding ? ''
`` I need not plump up to the elbows , brother , '' said Sophy , smiling : `` nor is it necessary that I should be a cook : but , if it were necessary , I hope I should be able to make a pudding . ''
`` Yes , yes , '' cried Marianne , warmly ; `` and she would jump up , and put by all her things in a minute if it were necessary , and run down stairs and up again like lightning , or do anything that was ever so disagreeable to her , even about the suet , with all her nicety , brother , I assure you , as she used to do anything , everything for me , when I was ill last winter .
Oh , brother , she can do anything ; and she could make the best plum- pudding in the whole world , I 'm sure , in a minute , if it were necessary . ''
CHAPTER II .
A knock at the door , from Mrs .
Theresa Tattle 's servant , recalled Marianne to the business of the day .
`` There , '' said Frederick , `` we have sent no answer all this time .
It's necessary to think of that in a minute . ''
The servant came with his mistress ' compliments , to let the young ladies and Mr .
Frederick know that she was waiting tea for them .
`` Waiting !
then we must go , '' said Frederick .
The servant opened the door wider , to let him pass , and Marianne thought she must follow her brother : so they went downstairs together , while Sophy gave her own message to the servant , and quietly stayed at her usual occupations .
Mrs .
Tattle was seated at her tea-table , with a large plate of macaroons beside her when Frederick and Marianne entered .
She was `` delighted '' they were come , and `` grieved '' not to see Miss Sophy along with them .
Marianne coloured a little ; for though she had precipitately followed her brother , and though he had quieted her conscience for a moment by saying `` You know papa and mamma told us to do what we thought best , '' yet she did not feel quite pleased with herself : and it was not till after Mrs .
Theresa had exhausted all her compliments , and half her macaroons , that she could restore her spirits to their usual height .
`` Come , Mr .
Frederick , '' said she after tea , `` you promised to make me laugh ; and nobody can make me laugh so well as yourself . ''
`` Oh , brother , '' said Marianne , `` show Mrs .
Theresa Dr .
Carbuncle eating his dinner ; and I 'll be Mrs .
Carbuncle . ''
Marianne .
Now , my dear , what shall I help you to ?
Frederick .
`` My dear ! ''
she never calls him my dear , you know , but always Doctor .
Mar .
Well then , doctor , what will you eat to-day ?
Fred .
Eat , madam !
eat !
nothing !
nothing !
I do n't see anything here I can eat , ma'am .
Mar .
Here 's eels , sir ; let me help you to some eel -- stewed eel ; -- you used to be fond of stewed eel .
Fred .
Used , ma'am , used !
But I 'm sick of stewed eels .
You would tire one of anything .
Am I to see nothing but eels ?
And what 's this at the bottom ?
Mar .
Mutton , doctor , roast mutton ; if you 'll be so good as to cut it .
Fred .
Cut it , ma'am !
I ca n't cut it , I say ; it 's as hard as a deal board .
You might as well tell me to cut the table , ma'am .
Mutton , indeed !
not a bit of fat .
Roast mutton , indeed !
not a drop of gravy .
Mutton , truly !
quite a cinder .
I 'll have none of it .
Here , take it away ; take it downstairs to the cook .
It 's a very hard case , Mrs .
Carbuncle , that I can never have a bit of anything that I can eat at my own table , Mrs .
Carbuncle , since I was married , ma'am , I that am the easiest man in the whole world to please about my dinner .
It 's really very extraordinary , Mrs .
Carbuncle !
What have you at that corner there , under the cover ?
Mar .
Patties , sir ; oyster patties .
Fred .
Patties , ma'am !
kickshaws !
I hate kickshaws .
Not worth putting under a cover , ma'am .
And why not have glass covers , that one may see one 's dinner before one , before it grows cold with asking questions , Mrs .
Carbuncle , and lifting up covers ?
But nobody has any sense : and I see no water plates anywhere , lately .
Mar .
Do , pray , doctor , let me help you to a bit of chicken before it gets cold , my dear .
Fred .
( aside ) .
`` My dear , '' again , Marianne !
Mar .
Yes , brother , because she is frightened , you know , and Mrs .
Carbuncle always says `` my dear '' to him when she 's frightened , and looks so pale from side to side ; and sometimes she cries before dinner 's done , and then all the company are quite silent , and do n't know what to do . ''
`` Oh , such a little creature ; to have so much sense , too ! ''
exclaimed Mrs .
Theresa , with rapture .
`` Mr .
Frederick , you 'll make me die with laughing !
Pray go on , Dr .
Carbuncle . ''
Fred .
Well , ma'am , then if I must eat something , send me a bit of fowl ; a leg and wing , the liver wing , and a bit of the breast , oyster sauce , and a slice of that ham , if you please , ma'am .
( Dr .
Carbuncle eats voraciously , with his head down to his plate , and , dropping the sauce , he buttons up his coat tight across the breast . )
Fred .
Here ; a plate , knife and fork , bit o ' bread , a glass of Dorchester ale !
`` Oh , admirable ! ''
exclaimed Mrs .
Tattle , clapping her hands .
`` Now , brother , suppose that it is after dinner , '' said Marianne ; `` and show us how the doctor goes to sleep . ''
Frederick threw himself back in an arm-chair , leaning his head back , with his mouth open , snoring ; nodded from time to time , crossed and uncrossed his legs , tried to awake himself by twitching his wig , settling his collar , blowing his nose and rapping on the lid of his snuff-box .
All which infinitely diverted Mrs .
Tattle , who , when she could stop herself from laughing , declared `` It made her sigh , too , to think of the life poor Mrs .
Carbuncle led with that man , and all for nothing , too ; for her jointure was nothing , next to nothing , though a great thing , to be sure , her friends thought for her , when she was only Sally Ridgeway before she was married .
Such a wife as she makes , '' continued Mrs .
Theresa , lifting up her hands and eyes to heaven , `` and so much as she has gone through , the brute ought to be ashamed of himself if he does not leave her something extraordinary in his will ; for turn it which way she will , she can never keep a carriage , or live like anybody else , on her jointure , after all , she tells me , poor soul !
A sad prospect , after her husband 's death , to look forward to , instead of being comfortable , as her friends expected ; and she , poor young thing !
knowing no better when they married her !
People should look into these things , beforehand , or never marry at all , I say , Miss Marianne . ''
Miss Marianne , who did not clearly comprehend this affair of the jointure , or the reason why Mrs .
Carbuncle would be so unhappy after her husband 's death , turned to Frederick , who was at that instant studying Mrs .
Theresa as a future character to mimic .
`` Brother , '' said Marianne , '' now sing an Italian song for us like Miss Croker .
Pray , Miss Croker , favour us with a song .
Mrs .
Theresa Tattle has never had the pleasure of hearing you sing ; she 's quite impatient to hear you sing . ''
`` Yes , indeed , I am , '' said Mrs .
Theresa .
Frederick put his hands before him affectedly ; `` Oh , indeed , ma'am !
indeed , ladies !
I really am so hoarse , it distresses me so to be pressed to sing ; besides , upon my word , I have quite left off singing .
I've never sung once , except for very particular people , this winter . ''
Mar .
But Mrs .
Theresa Tattle is a very particular person .
I 'm sure you 'll sing for her .
Fred .
Certainly , ma'am , I allow that you use a powerful argument ; but I assure you now , I would do my best to oblige you , but I absolutely have forgotten all my English songs .
Nobody hears anything but Italian now , and I have been so giddy as to leave my Italian music behind me .
Besides , I make it a rule never to hazard myself without an accompaniment .
Mar .
Oh , try , Miss Croker , for once .
[ Frederick sings , after much preluding . ]
Violante in the pantry , Gnawing of a mutton-bone ; How she gnawed it , How she claw 'd it , When she found herself alone !
`` Charming ! ''
exclaimed Mrs .
Tattle ; `` so like Miss Croker , I 'm sure I shall think of you , Mr .
Frederick , when I hear her asked to sing again .
Her voice , however , introduces her to very pleasant parties , and she 's a girl that 's very much taken notice of , and I do n't doubt will go off vastly well .
She 's a particular favourite of mine , you must know ; and I mean to do her a piece of service the first opportunity , by saying something or other , that shall go round to her relations in Northumberland , and make them do something for her ; as well they may , for they are all rolling in gold , and wo n't give her a penny . ''
Mar .
Now , brother , read the newspaper like Counsellor Puff .
`` Oh , pray do , Mr .
Frederick , for I declare I admire you of all things !
You are quite yourself to-night .
Here 's a newspaper , sir , pray let us have Counsellor Puff .
It 's not late . ''
[ Frederick reads in a pompous voice . ]
`` As a delicate white hand has ever been deemed a distinguishing ornament in either sex , Messrs .
Valiant and Wise conceive it to be their duty to take the earliest opportunity to advertise the nobility and gentry of Great Britain in general , and their friends in particular , that they have now ready for sale , as usual , at the Hippocrates ' Head , a fresh assortment of new-invented , much admired , primrose soap .
To prevent impositions and counterfeits , the public are requested to take notice , that the only genuine primrose soap is stamped on the outside , 'Valiant and Wise . ' ''
`` Oh , you most incomparable mimic !
't is absolutely the counsellor himself .
I absolutely must show you , some day , to my friend Lady Battersby ; you'd absolutely make her die with laughing ; and she 'd quite adore you , '' said Mrs .
Theresa , who was well aware that every pause must be filled with flattery .
`` Pray go on , pray go on .
I shall never be tired , if I sit looking at you these hundred years . ''
Stimulated by these plaudits , Frederick proceeded to show how Colonel Epaulette blew his nose , flourished his cambric handkerchief , bowed to Lady Diana Periwinkle , and admired her work , saying , `` Done by no hands , as you may guess , but those of Fairly Fair . ''
Whilst Lady Diana , he observed , simpered so prettily , and took herself so quietly for Fairly Fair , not perceiving that the colonel was admiring his own nails all the while .
Next to Colonel Epaulette , Frederick , at Marianne 's particular desire , came into the room like Sir Charles Slang .
`` Very well , brother , '' cried she , `` your hand down to the very bottom of your pocket , and your other shoulder up to your ear ; but you are not quite wooden enough , and you should walk as if your hip were out of joint .
There now , Mrs .
Tattle , are not those good eyes ?
They stare so like his , without seeming to see anything all the while . ''
`` Excellent !
admirable !
Mr .
Frederick .
I must say that you are the best mimic of your age I ever saw , and I 'm sure Lady Battersby will think so too .
That is Sir Charles to the very life .
But with all that , you must know he 's a mighty pleasant , fashionable young man when you come to know him , and has a great deal of sense under all that , and is of a very good family -- the Slangs , you know .
Sir Charles will come into a fine fortune himself next year , if he can keep clear of gambling , which I hear is his foible , poor young man !
Pray go on .
I interrupt you , Mr .
Frederick . ''
`` Now , brother , '' said Marianne .
`` No , Marianne , I can do no more .
I 'm quite tired , and I will do no more , '' said Frederick , stretching himself at full length upon a sofa .
Even in the midst of laughter , and whilst the voice of flattery yet sounded in his ear , Frederick felt sad , displeased with himself , and disgusted with Mrs .
Theresa .
`` What a deep sigh was there ! ''
said Mrs .
Theresa ; `` what can make you sigh so bitterly ?
You , who make everybody else laugh .
Oh , such another sigh again ! ''
`` Marianne , '' cried Frederick , `` do you remember the man in the mask ? ''
`` What man in the mask , brother ? ''
`` The man -- the actor -- the buffoon , that my father told us of , who used to cry behind the mask that made everybody else laugh . ''
`` Cry !
bless me , '' said Mrs .
Theresa , `` mighty odd !
very extraordinary !
but one ca n't be surprised at meeting with extraordinary characters amongst that race of people , actors by profession , you know ; for they are brought up from the egg to make their fortune , or at least their bread by their oddities .
But , my dear Mr .
Frederick , you are quite pale , quite exhausted ; no wonder -- what will you have ?
a glass of cowslip-wine ? ''
`` Oh no , thank you , ma'am , '' said Frederick .
`` Oh yes ; indeed you must not leave me without taking something ; and Miss Marianne must have another macaroon .
I insist upon it , '' said Mrs .
Theresa , ringing the bell .
`` It is not late , and my man Christopher will bring up the cowslip-wine in a minute . ''
`` But , Sophy !
and papa and mamma , you know , will come home presently , '' said Marianne .
`` Oh !
Miss Sophy has her books and drawings .
You know she 's never afraid of being alone .
Besides , to-night it was her own choice .
And as to your papa and mamma , they wo n't be home to-night , I 'm pretty sure ; for a gentleman , who had it from their own authority , told me where they were going , which is further off than they think ; but they did not consult me ; and I fancy they 'll be obliged to sleep out ; so you need not be in a hurry about them .
We 'll have candles . ''
The door opened just as Mrs .
Tattle was going to ring the bell again for candles and the cowslip-wine .
`` Christopher !
Christopher ! ''
said Mrs .
Theresa , who was standing at the fire , with her back to the door , when it opened , `` Christopher !
pray bring -- Do you hear ? ''
but no Christopher answered ; and , upon turning round , Mrs .
Tattle , instead of Christopher , beheld two little black figures , which stood perfectly still and silent .
It was so dark , that their forms could scarcely be discerned .
`` In the name of heaven , who and what may you be ?
Speak , I conjure you !
what are ye ? ''
`` The chimney-sweepers , ma'am , an ' please your ladyship . ''
`` Chimney-sweepers ! ''
repeated Frederick and Marianne , bursting out a- laughing .
`` Chimney-sweepers ! ''
repeated Mrs .
Theresa , provoked at the recollection of her late solemn address to them .
`` Chimney-sweepers !
and could not you say so a little sooner ?
Pray , what brings you here , gentlemen , at this time of night ? ''
`` The bell rang , ma'am , '' , answered a squeaking voice .
`` The bell rang !
yes , for Christopher .
The boy 's mad , or drunk . ''
`` Ma'am , '' said the tallest of the chimney-sweepers , who had not yet spoken , and who now began in a very blunt manner ; `` ma'am , your brother desired us to come up when the bell rang ; so we did . ''
`` My brother ?
I have no brother , dunce , '' said Mrs .
Theresa .
`` Mr .
Eden , madam . ''
`` Ho , ho ! ''
said Mrs .
Tattle , in a more complacent tone , `` the boy takes me for Miss Bertha Eden , I perceive '' ; and , flattered to be taken in the dark by a chimney-sweeper for a young and handsome lady , Mrs .
Theresa laughed , and informed him `` that they had mistaken the room ; and they must go up another pair of stairs , and turn to the left . ''
The chimney-sweeper with the squeaking voice bowed , thanked her ladyship for this information , said , `` Good night to ye , quality '' ; and they both moved towards the door .
`` Stay , '' said Mrs .
Tattle , whose curiosity was excited ; `` what can the Edens want with chimney-sweepers at this time o ' night , I wonder ?
Christopher , did you hear anything about it ? ''
said the lady to her footman , who was now lighting the candles .
`` Upon my word , ma'am , '' said the servant , `` I ca n't say ; but I 'll step down below and inquire .
I heard them talking about it in the kitchen ; but I only got a word here and there , for I was hunting for the snuff-dish , as I knew it must be for candles when I heard the bell ring , ma'am ; so I thought to find the snuff-dish before I answered the bell , for I knew it must be for candles you rang .
But , if you please , I 'll step down now , ma'am , and see about the chimney-sweepers . ''
`` Yes , step down , do ; and , Christopher , bring up the cowslip-wine , and some more macaroons for my little Marianne . ''
Marianne withdrew rather coldly from a kiss which Mrs .
Tattle was going to give her ; for she was somewhat surprised at the familiarity with which this lady talked to her footman .
She had not been accustomed to these familiarities in her father and mother , and she did not like them .
`` Well , '' said Mrs .
Tattle to Christopher , who was now returned , `` what is the news ? ''
`` Ma'am , the little fellow with the squeaking voice has been telling me the whole story .
The other morning , ma'am , early , he and the other were down the hill sweeping in Paradise Row .
Those chimneys , they say , are difficult ; and the square fellow , ma'am , the biggest of the two boys , got wedged in the chimney .
The other little fellow was up at the top at the time , and he heard the cry ; but in his fright , and all , he did not know what to do , ma'am ; for he looked about from the top of the chimney , and not a soul could he see stirring , but a few that he could not make attend to his screech ; the boy within almost stifling too .
So he screeched , and screeched , all he could ; and by the greatest chance in life , ma'am , old Mr .
Eden was just going down the hill to fetch his morning walk . ''
`` Ay , '' interrupted Mrs .
Theresa , `` friend Ephraim is one of your early risers . ''
`` Well , '' said Marianne , impatiently .
`` So , ma'am , hearing the screech , he turns and sees the sweep ; and at once he understands the matter -- '' '' I 'm sure he must have taken some time to understand it , '' interposed Mrs .
Tattle , `` for he 's the slowest creature breathing , and the deafest in company .
Go on , Christopher .
So the sweep did make him hear . ''
`` So he says , ma'am ; and so the old gentleman went in and pulled the boy out of the chimney , with much ado , ma'am . ''
`` Bless me ! ''
exclaimed Mrs .
Theresa ; `` but did old Eden go up the chimney himself after the boy , wig and all ?
`` Why , ma'am , '' said Christopher , with a look of great delight , `` that was all as one , as the very 'dentical words I put to the boy myself , when he telled me his story .
But , ma'am , that was what I could n't get out of him , neither , rightly , for he is a churl -- the big boy that was stuck in the chimney , I mean ; for when I put the question to him about the wig , laughing like , he would n't take it laughing like at all ; but would only make answer to us like a bear , 'He saved my life , that 's all I know ' ; and this over again , ma'am , to all the kitchen round , that cross-questioned him .
But I finds him stupid and ill-mannered like , for I offered him a shilling , ma'am , myself , to tell about the wig ; but he put it back in a way that did not become such as he , to no lady 's butler , ma'am ; whereupon I turns to the slim fellow ( and he 's smarterer , and more mannerly , ma'am , with a tongue in his head for his betters ) , but he could not resolve me my question either ; for he was up at the top of the chimney the best part o ' the time : and when he came down Mr .
Eden had his wig on , but had his arm all bare and bloody , ma'am . ''
`` Poor Mr .
Eden ! ''
exclaimed Marianne .
`` Oh , miss , '' continued the servant , `` and the chimney-sweep himself was so bruised , and must have been killed . ''
`` Well , well !
but he 's alive now ; go on with your story , Christopher , '' said Mrs .
T .
`` Chimney-sweepers get wedged in chimneys every day ; it's part of their trade , and it 's a happy thing when they come off with a few bruises .
* To be sure , '' added she , observing that both Frederick and Marianne looked displeased at this speech , `` to be sure , if one may believe this story , there was some real danger . ''
* This atrocious practice is now happily superseded by the use of sweeping machines .
`` Real danger !
yes , indeed , '' said Marianne ; `` and I 'm sure I think Mr .
Eden was very good . ''
`` Certainly it was a most commendable action , and quite providential .
So I shall take an opportunity of saying , when I tell the story in all companies ; and the boy may thank his kind stars , I 'm sure , to the end of his days , for such an escape -- But pray , Christopher , '' said she , persisting in her conversation with Christopher , who was now laying the cloth for supper , `` pray , which house was it in Paradise Row ?
where the Eagles or the Miss Ropers lodge ?
or which ? ''
`` It was at my Lady Battersby 's , ma'am . ''
`` Ha !
ha ! ''
cried Mrs .
Theresa , `` I thought we should get to the bottom of the affair at last .
This is excellent !
This will make an admirable story for my Lady Battersby the next time I see her .
These Quakers are so sly !
Old Eden , I know , has long wanted to obtain an introduction into that house ; and a charming charitable expedient hit upon !
My Lady Battersby will enjoy this , of all things . ''
CHAPTER III .
`` Now , '' continued Mrs .
Theresa , turning to Frederick , as soon as the servant had left the room , `` now , Mr .
Frederick Montague , I have a favour- -such a favour -- to ask of you ; it 's a favour which only you can grant ; you have such talents , and would do the thing so admirably ; and my Lady Battersby would quite adore you for it .
She will do me the honour to be here to spend an evening to-morrow .
I 'm convinced Mr .
and Mrs .
Montague will find themselves obliged to stay out another day , and I so long to show you off to her ladyship ; and your Doctor Carbuncle , and your Counsellor Puff , and your Miss Croker , and all your charming characters .
You must let me introduce you to her ladyship to-morrow evening .
Promise me . ''
`` Oh , ma'am , '' said Frederick , `` I can not promise you any such thing , indeed .
I am much obliged to you ; but indeed I can not come . ''
`` Why not , my dear sir ?
why not ?
You do n't think I mean you should promise , if you are certain your papa and mamma will be home . ''
`` If they do come home , I will ask them about it , '' said Frederick , hesitating ; for though he by no means wished to accept the invitation , he had not yet acquired the necessary power of decidedly saying No .
`` Ask them ! ''
repeated Mrs .
Theresa .
`` My dear sir , at your age , must you ask your papa and mamma about such things ? ''
`` Must !
no , ma'am , '' said Frederick ; `` but I said I would .
I know I need not , because my father and mother always let me judge for myself almost about everything . ''
`` And about this , I am sure , '' cried Marianne .
`` Papa and mamma , you know , just as they were going away , said , 'If Mrs .
Theresa asks you to come , do as you think best ' '' '' Well , then , '' said Mrs .
Theresa , `` you know it rests with yourselves , if you may do as you please . ''
`` To be sure I may , madam , '' said Frederick , colouring from that species of emotion which is justly called false shame , and which often conquers real shame ; `` to be sure , ma'am , I may do as I please . ''
`` Then I may make sure of you , '' said Mrs .
Theresa ; `` for now it would be downright rudeness to tell a lady you wo n't do as she pleases .
Mr .
Frederick Montague , I 'm sure , is too wellbred a young gentleman to do so unpolite , so ungallant a thing ! ''
The jargon of politeness and gallantry is frequently brought by the silly acquaintance of young people to confuse their simple morality and clear good sense .
A new and unintelligible system is presented to them , in a language foreign to their understanding , and contradictory to their feelings .
They hesitate between new motives and old principles .
From the fear of being thought ignorant , they become affected ; and from the dread of being thought to be children act like fools .
But all this they feel only when they are in the company of such people as Mrs .
Theresa Tattle .
`` Ma'am , '' Frederick began , `` I do n't mean to be rude ; but I hope you'll excuse me from coming to drink tea with you to-morrow , because my father and mother are not acquainted with Lady Battersby , and maybe they might not like -- '' '' Take care , take care , '' said Mrs .
Theresa , laughing at his perplexity : '' you want to get off from obliging me , and you do n't know how .
You had very nearly made a most shocking blunder in putting it all upon poor Lady Battersby .
Now you know it 's impossible that Mr .
and Mrs .
Montague could have in nature the slightest objection to introducing you to my Lady Battersby at my own house ; for , do n't you know , that , besides her ladyship 's many unquestionable qualities , which one need not talk of , she is cousin , but once removed , to the Trotters of Lancashire -- your mother's great favourites ?
And there is not a person at the Wells , I 'll venture to say , could be of more advantage to your sister Sophy , in the way of partners , when she comes to go the balls , which it 's to be supposed she will , some time or other ; and as you are so good a brother , that 's a thing to be looked to , you know .
Besides , as to yourself , there's nothing her ladyship delights in so much as in a good mimic ; and she'll quite adore you ! ''
`` But I do n't want her to adore me , ma'am , '' said Frederick , bluntly ; then , correcting himself , added , `` I mean for being a mimic . ''
`` Why not , my love ?
Between friends , can there be any harm in showing one 's talents ?
You that have such talents to show .
She 'll keep your secret , I 'll answer for her ; and , '' added she , `` you need n't be afraid of her criticism ; for , between you and me , she 's no great critic ; so you'll come .
Well , thank you , that 's settled .
How you have made me beg and pray !
but you know your own value , I see ; as you entertaining people always do .
One must ask a wit , like a fine singer , so often .
Well , but now for the favour I was going to ask you . ''
Frederick looked surprised ; for he thought that the favour of his company was what she meant : but she explained herself farther .
`` As to the old Quaker who lodges above , old Ephraim Eden -- my Lady Battersby and I have so much diversion about him .
He is the best character , the oddest creature !
If you were but to see him come into the rooms with those stiff skirts , or walking with his eternal sister Bertha , and his everlasting broad-brimmed hat !
One knows him a mile off !
But then his voice and way , and altogether , if one could get them to the life , they 'd be better than anything on the stage ; better even than anything I 've seen to-night ; and I think you 'd make a capital Quaker for my Lady Battersby ; but then the thing is , one can never get to hear the old quiz talk .
Now you , who have so much invention and cleverness -- I have no invention myself ; but could you not hit upon some way of seeing him , so that you might get him by heart ?
I 'm sure you , who are so quick , would only want to see him , and hear him , for half a minute , to be able to take him off , so as to kill one with laughing .
But I have no invention . ''
`` Oh , as to the invention , '' said Frederick , `` I know an admirable way of doing the thing , if that is all ; but then remember , I do n't say I will do the thing , for I will not .
But I know a way of getting up into his room , and seeing him , without his knowing me to be there . ''
`` Oh , tell it me , you charming , clever creature ! ''
`` But , remember , I do not say I will do it . ''
`` Well , well , let us hear it ; and you shall do as you please afterwards .
Merciful goodness ! ''
exclaimed Mrs .
Tattle , `` do my ears deceive me ?
I declare I looked round , and thought I heard the squeaking chimney-sweeper was in the room ! ''
`` So did I , Frederick , I declare , '' cried Marianne , laughing , `` I never heard anything so like his voice in my life . ''
Frederick imitated the squeaking voice of this chimney-sweeper to great perfection .
`` Now , '' continued he , `` this fellow is just my height .
The old Quaker , if my face were blackened , and if I were to change clothes with the chimney- sweeper , I 'll answer for it , would never know me . ''
`` Oh , it 's an admirable invention !
I give you infinite credit for it ! ''
exclaimed Mrs .
Theresa .
`` It shall , it must be done .
I 'll ring , and have the fellow up this minute . ''
`` Oh , no ; do not ring , '' said Frederick , stopping her hand , `` I do n't mean to do it .
You know you promised that I should do as I pleased .
I only told you my invention . ''
`` Well , well ; but only let me ring , and ask whether the chimney-sweepers are below .
You shall do as you please afterwards . ''
`` Christopher , shut the door .
Christopher , '' said she to the servant who came up when she rang , `` pray are the sweeps gone yet ? ''
`` No , ma'am . ''
`` But have they been up to old Eden yet ? ''
`` Oh , no , ma'am ; nor be not to go till the bell rings ; for Miss Bertha , ma'am , was asleep a-lying down , and her brother would n't have her wakened on no account whatsomever .
He came down hisself to the kitchen to the sweeps , though ; but would n't have , as I heard him say , his sister waked for no account .
But Miss Bertha 's bell will ring when she wakens for the sweeps , ma'am .
'T was she wanted to see the boy as her brother saved , and I suppose sent for him to give him something charitable , ma'am . ''
`` Well , never mind your suppositions , '' said Mrs .
Theresa ; `` run down this very minute to the little squeaking chimney-sweep , and send him up to me .
Quick , but do n't let the other bear come up with him . ''
Christopher , who had curiosity , as well as his mistress , when he returned with the chimney-sweeper , prolonged his own stay in the room by sweeping the hearth , throwing down the tongs and shovel , and picking them up again .
`` That will do , Christopher !
Christopher , that will do , I say , '' Mrs .
Theresa repeated in vain .
She was obliged to say , `` Christopher , you may go , '' before he would depart .
`` Now , '' said she to Frederick , `` step in here to the next room with this candle , and you 'll be equipped in an instant .
Only just change clothes with the boy ; only just let me see what a charming chimney-sweeper you'd make .
You shall do as you please afterwards . ''
`` Well , I 'll only change clothes with him , just to show you for one minute . ''
`` But , '' said Marianne to Mrs .
Theresa whilst Frederick was changing his clothes , `` I think Frederick is right about -- '' '' About what , love ? ''
`` I think he is in the right not to go up , though he can do it so easily , to see that gentleman ; I mean on purpose to mimic and laugh at him afterwards .
I do n't think that would be quite right . ''
`` Why , pray , Miss Marianne ? ''
`` Why , because he is so good-natured to his sister .
He would not let her be wakened . ''
`` Dear , it 's easy to be good in such little things ; and he wo n't have long to be good to her neither ; for I do n't think she will trouble him long in this world , anyhow . ''
`` What do you mean ? ''
said Marianne .
`` That she 'll die , child . ''
`` Die !
die with that beautiful colour in her cheeks !
How sorry her poor , poor brother will be !
But she will not die , I 'm sure , for she walks about and runs upstairs so lightly !
Oh , you must be quite mistaken , I hope . ''
`` If I 'm mistaken , Dr .
Panado Cardamum 's mistaken too , then , that 's my comfort .
He says , unless the waters work a miracle , she stands a bad chance ; and she wo n't follow my advice , and consult the doctor for her health . ''
`` He would frighten her to death , perhaps , '' said Marianne .
`` I hope Frederick wo n't go up to disturb her . ''
`` Lud , child , you are turned simpleton all of a sudden ; how can your brother disturb her more than the real chimney-sweeper ? ''
`` But I do n't think it 's right , '' persisted Marianne , `` and I shall tell him so . ''
`` Nay , Miss Marianne , I do n't commend you now .
Young ladies should not be so forward to give opinions and advice to their elder brothers unasked ; and I presume that Mr .
Frederick and I must know what 's right as well as Miss Marianne .
Hush !
here he is .
Oh , the capital figure ! ''
cried Mrs .
Theresa .
`` Bravo , bravo ! ''
cried she , as Frederick entered in the chimney- sweeper 's dress ; and as he spoke , saying , `` I 'm afraid , please your ladyship , to dirt your ladyship 's carpet , '' she broke out into immoderate raptures , calling him `` her charming chimney-sweeper ! ''
and repeating that she knew beforehand the character would do for him .
Mrs .
Theresa instantly rang the bell , in spite of all expostulation -- ordered Christopher to send up the other chimney-sweeper -- triumphed in observing that Christopher did not know Frederick when he came into the room ; and offered to lay any wager that the other chimney-sweeper would mistake him for his companion .
And so he did ; and when Frederick spoke , the voice was so very like , that it was scarcely possible that he should have perceived the difference .
Marianne was diverted by this scene ; but she started , when in the midst of it they heard a bell ring .
`` That 's the lady 's bell , and we must go , '' said the blunt chimney-sweeper .
`` Go , then , about your business , '' said Mrs .
Theresa , `` and here 's a shilling for you , to drink , my honest fellow .
I did not know you were so much bruised when I first saw you .
I wo n't detain you .
Go , '' said she , pushing Frederick towards the door .
Marianne sprang forward to speak to him ; but Mrs .
Theresa kept her off ; and , though Frederick resisted , the lady shut the door upon him by superior force , and , having locked it , there was no retreat .
Mrs .
Tattle and Marianne waited impatiently for Frederick 's return .
`` I hear them , '' cried Marianne , `` I hear them coming downstairs . ''
They listened again , and all was silent .
At length they suddenly heard a great noise of many steps in the hall .
`` Merciful ! ''
exclaimed Mrs .
Theresa , `` it must be your father and mother come back . ''
Marianne ran to unlock the room door , and Mrs .
Theresa followed her into the hall .
The hall was rather dark , but under the lamp a crowd of people , all the servants in the house having gathered together .
As Mrs .
Theresa approached , the crowd opened in silence , and in the midst she beheld Frederick , with blood streaming from his face .
His head was held by Christopher ; and the chimney-sweeper was holding a basin for him .
`` Merciful !
what will become of me ? ''
exclaimed Mrs .
Theresa .
`` Bleeding !
he 'll bleed to death !
Can nobody think of anything that will stop blood in a minute ?
A key , a large key down his back -- a key -- has nobody a key ?
Mr .
and Mrs .
Montague will be here before he has done bleeding .
A key !
cobwebs !
a puff ball !
for mercy 's sake !
Can nobody think of anything that will stop blood in a minute ?
Gracious me !
he 'll bleed to death , I believe . ''
`` He 'll bleed to death !
Oh , my brother ! ''
cried Marianne , catching hold of the words ; and terrified , she ran upstairs , crying , `` Sophy , oh , Sophy !
come down this minute , or he 'll be dead !
My brother 's bleeding to death !
Sophy !
Sophy !
come down , or he 'll be dead ! ''
`` Let go the basin , you , '' said Christopher , pulling the basin out of the chimney-sweeper 's hand , who had all this time stood in silence ; `` you are not fit to hold the basin for a gentleman . ''
`` Let him hold it , '' said Frederick ; `` he did not mean to hurt me . ''
`` That 's more than he deserves .
I 'm certain sure he might have known well enough it was Mr .
Frederick all the time , and he 'd no business to go to fight -- such a one as he -- with a gentleman . ''
`` I did not know he was a gentleman ! ''
said the chimney-sweeper , `` how could I ? ''
`` How could he , indeed ! ''
said Frederick ; `` he shall hold the basin . ''
`` Gracious me !
I 'm glad to hear him speak like himself again , at anyrate , '' cried Mrs .
Theresa .
`` And here comes Miss Sophy , too . ''
`` Sophy ! ''
cried Frederick .
`` Oh , Sophy , do n't you come -- do n't look at me ; you 'll despise me . ''
`` My brother !
where ?
where ? ''
said Sophy , looking , as she thought , at the two chimney-sweepers .
`` It 's Frederick , '' said Marianne : `` that 's my brother . ''
`` Miss Sophy , do n't be alarmed , '' Mrs .
Theresa began ; `` but gracious goodness !
I wish Miss Bertha -- '' At this instant a female figure in white appeared upon the stairs ; she passed swiftly on , whilst everyone gave way before her .
`` Oh , Miss Bertha ! ''
cried Mrs .
Theresa , catching hold of her gown to stop her , as she came near Frederick .
`` Oh , Miss Eden , your beautiful India muslin !
take care of the chimney sweeper , for heaven 's sake . ''
But she pressed forward .
`` It 's my brother , will he die ? ''
cried Marianne , throwing her arms round her , and looking up as if to a being of a superior order .
`` Will he bleed to death ? ''
`` No , my love ! ''
answered a sweet voice : `` do not frighten thyself . ''
`` I 've done bleeding , '' said Frederick .
`` Dear me , Miss Marianne , if you would not make such a rout , '' cried Mrs .
Tattle .
`` Miss Bertha , it 's nothing but a frolic .
You see Mr .
Frederick Montague only in a masquerade dress .
Nothing in the world but a frolic , ma'am .
You see he 's stopped bleeding .
I was frightened out of my wits at first .
I thought it was his eye , but I see it 's only his nose .
All's well that ends well .
Mr .
Frederick , we 'll keep your counsel .
Pray , ma'am , let us ask no questions ; it 's only a boyish frolic .
Come , Mr .
Frederick , this way , into my room , and I 'll give you a towel and some clean water , and you can get rid of this masquerade dress .
Make haste , for fear your father and mother should drop in upon us . ''
`` Do not be afraid of thy father and mother .
They are surely thy best friends , '' said a voice .
It was the voice of an elderly gentleman , who now stood behind Frederick .
`` Oh , sir , oh , Mr .
Eden , '' said Frederick , turning to him .
`` Do n't betray me !
for goodness ' sake ! ''
whispered Mrs .
Tattle , `` say nothing about me . ''
`` I 'm not thinking about you .
Let me speak , '' cried he , pushing away her hand , which stopped his mouth .
`` I shall say nothing about you , I promise you , '' said Frederick , with a look of contempt .
`` No , but for your own sake , my dear sir , your papa and mamma .
Bless me !
is not that Mrs .
Montague 's carriage ? ''
`` My brother , ma'am , '' said Sophy , `` is not afraid of my father and mother's coming back .
Let him speak ; he was going to speak the truth . ''
`` To be sure , Miss Sophia , I would n't hinder him from speaking the truth ; but it 's not proper , I presume , ma'am , to speak truth at all times , and in all places , and before everybody , servants and all .
I only wanted , ma'am , to hinder your brother from exposing himself .
A hall , I apprehend , is not a proper place for explanation . ''
`` Here , '' said Mr .
Eden , opening the door of his room , which was on the opposite side of the hall to Mrs .
Tattle 's .
`` Here is a place , '' said he to Frederick , `` where thou mayst speak the truth at all times , and before everybody . ''
`` Nay , my room 's at Mr .
Frederick Montague 's service , and my door 's open too .
This way , pray , '' said she , pulling his arm .
But Frederick broke from her , and followed Mr .
Eden .
`` Oh , sir , will you forgive me ? ''
cried he .
`` Forgive thee ! -- and what have I to forgive ! ''
`` Forgive , brother , without asking what , '' said Bertha , smiling .
`` He shall know all ! ''
cried Frederick ; `` all that concerns myself , I mean .
Sir , I disguised myself in this dress ; I came up to your room to-night on purpose to see you , without your knowing it , that I might mimic you .
The chimney-sweeper , where is he ? ''
said Frederick , looking round ; and he ran into the hall to see for him .
`` May he come in ?
he may -- he is a brave , an honest , good , grateful boy .
He never guessed who I was .
After we left you we went down to the kitchen together , and there , fool as I was , for the pleasure of making Mr .
Christopher and the servants laugh , began to mimic you .
This boy said he would not stand by and hear you laughed at ; that you had saved his life ; that I ought to be ashamed of myself ; that you had just given me half a crown ; and so you had ; but I went on , and told him I 'd knock him down if he said another word .
He did ; I gave the first blow ; we fought ; I came to the ground ; the servants pulled me up again .
They found out , I do n't know how , that I was not a chimney- sweeper .
The rest you saw .
And now can you forgive me , sir ? ''
said Frederick to Mr .
Eden , seizing hold of his hand .
`` The other hand , friend , '' said the Quaker , gently withdrawing his right hand , which everybody now observed was much swelled , and putting it into his bosom again .
`` This , and welcome , '' offering his other hand to Frederick , and shaking his with a smile .
`` Oh , that other hand ! ''
said Frederick , `` that was hurt , I remember .
How ill I have behaved -- extremely ill !
But this is a lesson that I shall never forget as long as I live .
I hope for the future I shall behave like a gentleman . ''
`` And like a man -- and like a good man , I am sure thou wilt , '' said the good Quaker , shaking Frederick 's hand affectionately ; `` or I am much mistaken , friend , in that black countenance . ''
`` You are not mistaken , '' cried Marianne .
`` Frederick will never be persuaded again by anybody to do what he does not think right : and now , brother , you may wash your black countenance . ''
Just when Frederick had got rid of half his black countenance , a double knock was heard at the door .
It was Mr .
and Mrs .
Montague .
`` What will you do now ? ''
whispered Mrs .
Theresa to Frederick , as his father and mother came into the room .
`` A chimney-sweeper covered with blood ! ''
exclaimed Mr .
and Mrs .
Montague .
`` Father , I am Frederick , '' said he , stepping forward towards them , as they stood in astonishment .
`` Frederick !
my son ! ''
`` Yes , mother , I 'm not hurt half so much as I deserve ; I 'll tell you -- '' '' Nay , '' interrupted Bertha , `` let my brother tell the story this time .
Thou hast told it once , and told it well ; no one but my brother could tell it better . ''
`` A story never tells so well the second time , to be sure , '' said Mrs .
Theresa ; `` but Mr .
Eden will certainly make the best of it . ''
Without taking any notice of Mrs .
Tattle , or her apprehensive looks , Mr .
Eden explained all he knew of the affair in a few words .
`` Your son , '' concluded he , `` will quickly put off his dirty dress .
The dress hath not stained the mind ; that is fair and honourable .
When he found himself in the wrong , he said so ; nor was he in haste to conceal his adventure from his father ; this made me think well of both father and son .
I speak plainly , friend , for that is best .
But what is become of the other chimney-sweeper ?
He will want to go home , '' said Mr .
Eden , turning to Mrs .
Theresa .
Without making any reply , she hurried out of the room as fast as possible , and returned in a few moments , with a look of extreme consternation .
`` Here is a catastrophe indeed !
Now , indeed , Mr .
Frederick , your papa and mamma have reason to be angry .
A new suit of clothes ! -- the bare faced villain !
gone !
no sign of them in my closet , or anywhere .
The door was locked ; he must have gone up the chimney , out upon the leads , and so escaped ; but Christopher is after him .
I protest , Mrs .
Montague , you take it too quietly .
The wretch ! -- a new suit of clothes , blue coat and buff waistcoat .
I never heard of such a thing !
I declare , Mr .
Montague , you are vastly good , not to be in a passion , '' added Mrs .
Theresa .
`` Madam , '' replied Mr .
Montague , with a look of much civil contempt , `` I think the loss of a suit of clothes , and even the disgrace that my son has been brought to this evening , fortunate circumstances in his education .
He will , I am persuaded , judge and act for himself more wisely in future .
Nor will he be tempted to offend against humanity , for the sake of being called 'The best mimic in the world . ' ''
THE BARRING OUT ; OR , PARTY SPIRIT .
`` The mother of mischief , '' says an old proverb , `` is no bigger than a midge 's wing . ''
At Doctor Middleton 's school , there was a great tall dunce of the name of Fisher , who never could be taught how to look out a word in the dictionary .
He used to torment everybody with -- '' Do pray help me !
I ca n't make out this one word . ''
The person who usually helped him in his distress was a very clever , good natured boy , of the name of De Grey , who had been many years under Dr .
Middleton 's care , and who , by his abilities and good conduct , did him great credit .
The doctor certainly was both proud and fond of him ; but he was so well beloved , or so much esteemed by his companions , that nobody had ever called him by the odious name of favourite , until the arrival of a new scholar of the name of Archer .
Till Archer came , the ideas of FAVOURITES and PARTIES were almost unknown at Dr .
Middleton 's ; but he brought all these ideas fresh from a great public school , at which he had been educated -- at which he had acquired a sufficient quantity of Greek and Latin , and a superabundant quantity of party spirit .
His aim , the moment he came to a new school , was to get to the head of it , or at least to form the strongest party .
His influence , for he was a boy of considerable abilities , was quickly felt , though he had a powerful rival , as he thought proper to call him , in De Grey ; and , with HIM , a rival was always an enemy .
De Grey , so far from giving him any cause of hatred , treated him with a degree of cordiality , which would probably have had an effect upon Archer 's mind , if it had not been for the artifices of Fisher .
It may seem surprising , that a GREAT DUNCE should be able to work upon a boy like an Archer , who was called a great genius ; but when genius is joined to a violent temper , instead of being united to good sense , it is at the mercy even of dunces .
Fisher was mortally offended one morning by De Grey 's refusing to translate his whole lesson for him .
He went over to Archer , who , considering him as a partisan deserting from the enemy , received him with open arms , and translated his whole lesson without expressing MUCH contempt for his stupidity .
From this moment Fisher forgot all De Grey's former kindness , and considered only how he could in his turn mortify the person whom he felt to be so much his superior .
De Grey and Archer were now reading for a premium , which was to be given in their class .
Fisher betted on Archer 's head , who had not sense enough to despise the bet of a blockhead .
On the contrary he suffered him to excite the spirit of rivalship in its utmost fury by collecting the bets of all the school .
So that this premium now became a matter of the greatest consequence , and Archer , instead of taking the means to secure a judgment in his favour , was listening to the opinions of all his companions .
It was a prize which was to be won by his own exertions ; but he suffered himself to consider it as an affair of chance .
The consequence was , that he trusted to chance -- his partisans lost their wagers , and he the premium -- and his temper .
`` Mr .
Archer , '' said Dr .
Middleton , after the grand affair was decided , '' you have done all that genius alone could do ; but you , De Grey , have done all that genius and industry united could do . ''
`` Well ! ''
cried Archer , with affected gaiety , as soon as the doctor had left the room -- '' Well , I 'm content with MY sentence .
Genius alone !
for me -- industry for those who WANT it , '' added he , with a significant look at De Grey .
Fisher applauded this as a very spirited speech ; and , by insinuations that Dr .
Middleton `` always gave the premium to De Grey , '' and that `` those who had lost their bets might thank themselves for it , for being such simpletons as to bet against the favourite , '' he raised a murmur highly flattering to Archer , amongst some of the most credulous boys ; whilst others loudly proclaimed their belief in Dr .
Middleton 's impartiality .
These warmly congratulated De Grey .
At this Archer grew more and more angry , and when Fisher was proceeding to speak nonsense FOR him , pushed forward into the circle to De Grey , crying , `` I wish , Mr .
Fisher , you would let me fight my own battles ! ''
`` And _I_ wish , '' said young Townsend , who was fonder of diversions than of premiums , or battles , or of anything else -- '' _I_ wish , that we were not to have any battles ; after having worked like horses , do n't set about to fight like dogs .
Come , '' said he , tapping De Grey 's shoulder , `` let us see your new playhouse , do -- it 's a holiday , and let us make the most of it .
Let us have the 'School for Scandal , ' do ; and I 'll play Charles for you , and you , De Grey , shall be MY LITTLE PREMIUM .
Come , do open this new playhouse of yours to-night . ''
`` Come then ! ''
said De Grey , and he ran across the playground to a waste building at the farthest end of it , in which , at the earnest request of the whole community , and with the permission of Dr .
Middleton , he had with much pain and ingenuity erected a theatre .
`` The new theatre is going to be opened !
Follow the manager !
Follow the manager ! ''
echoed a multitude of voices .
`` FOLLOW THE MANAGER ! ''
echoed very disagreeably in Archer 's ear ; but as he could not be LEFT ALONE , he was also obliged to follow the manager .
The moment that the door was unlocked , the crowd rushed in : the delight and wonder expressed at the sight was great , and the applause and thanks which were bestowed upon the manager were long and loud .
Archer at least thought them long , for he was impatient till his voice could be heard .
When at length the acclamations had spent themselves , he walked across the stage with a knowing air , and looking round contemptuously .
`` And is THIS your famous playhouse ? ''
cried he .
`` I wish you had , any of you , seen the playhouse _I_ have been used to ? ''
These words made a great and visible change in the feelings and opinions of the public .
`` Who would be a servant of the public ?
or who would toil for popular applause ? ''
A few words spoken in a decisive tone by a new voice operated as a charm , and the playhouse was in an instant metamorphosed in the eyes of the spectators .
All gratitude for the past was forgotten , and the expectation of something better justified to the capricious multitude their disdain of what they had so lately pronounced to be excellent .
Everyone now began to criticise .
One observed , `` that the green curtain was full of holes , and would not draw up . ''
Another attacked the scenes ; '' Scenes !
they were not like real scenes -- Archer must know best , because he was used to these things . ''
So everybody crowded to hear something of the OTHER playhouse .
They gathered round Archer to hear the description of his playhouse , and at every sentence insulting comparisons were made .
When he had done , his auditors looked round , sighed and wished that Archer had been their manager .
They turned from De Grey as from a person who had done them an injury .
Some of his friends -- for he had friends who were not swayed by the popular opinion -- felt indignation at this ingratitude , and were going to express their feelings ; but De Grey stopped them , and begged that he might speak for himself .
`` Gentlemen , '' said he , coming forward , as soon as he felt that he had sufficient command of himself .
`` My friends , I see you are discontented with me and my playhouse .
I have done my best to please you ; but if anybody else can please you better , I shall be glad of it .
I did not work so hard for the glory of being your manager .
You have my free leave to tear down -- '' Here his voice faltered , but he hurried on -- '' You have my free leave to tear down all my work as fast as you please .
Archer , shake hands first , however , to show that there 's no malice in the case . ''
Archer , who was touched by what his rival said , and , stopping the hand of his new partisan , Fisher , cried , `` No , Fisher !
no ! -- no pulling down .
We can alter it .
There is a great deal of ingenuity in it , considering . ''
In vain Archer would now have recalled the public to reason , -- the time for reason was passed : enthusiasm had taken hold of their minds .
`` Down with it !
Down with it !
Archer for ever ! ''
cried Fisher , and tore down the curtain .
The riot once begun , nothing could stop the little mob , till the whole theatre was demolished .
The love of power prevailed in the mind of Archer ; he was secretly flattered by the zeal of his PARTY , and he mistook their love of mischief for attachment to himself .
De Grey looked on superior .
`` I said I could bear to see all this , and I can , '' said he ; `` now it is all over . ''
And now it was all over , there was silence .
The rioters stood still to take breath , and to look at what they had done .
There was a blank space before them .
In this moment of silence there was heard something like a voice .
`` Hush !
What strange voice is that ? ''
said Archer .
Fisher caught fast hold of his arm .
Everybody looked round to see where the voice came from .
It was dusk .
Two window-shutters at the farthest end of the building were seen to move slowly inwards .
De Grey , and in the same instant Archer , went forward ; and , as the shutters opened , there appeared through the hole the dark face and shrivelled hands of a very old gipsy .
She did not speak ; but she looked first at one and then at another .
At length she fixed her eyes on De Grey .
`` Well , woman , '' said he , `` what do you want with me ? ''
`` Want ! -- nothing -- with YOU , '' said the old woman ; `` do you want nothing with ME ? ''
`` Nothing , '' said De Grey .
Her eye immediately turned upon Archer , -- '' YOU want something with me , '' said she , with emphasis .
`` I -- what do I want ? ''
replied Archer .
`` No , '' said she , changing her tone , `` you want nothing -- nothing will you ever want , or I am much mistaken in that FACE . ''
In that WATCH-CHAIN , she should have said , for her quick eye had espied Archer 's watch-chain .
He was the only person in the company who had a watch , and she therefore judged him to be the richest .
`` Had you ever your fortune told , sir , in your life ? ''
`` Not I ! ''
said he , looking at De Grey , as if he was afraid of his ridicule , if he listened to the gipsy .
`` Not you !
No !
for you will make your own fortune , and the fortune of all that belong to you ! ''
`` There 's good news for my friends ! ''
cried Archer .
`` And I 'm one of them , remember that , '' cried Fisher .
`` And I , '' `` And I , '' joined a number of voices .
`` Good luck to them ! ''
cried the gipsy , `` good luck to them all ! ''
Then , as soon as they had acquired sufficient confidence in her good will , they pressed up to the window .
`` There , '' cried Townsend , as he chanced to stumble over the carpenter 's mitre box , which stood in the way , `` there 's a good omen for me .
I 've stumbled on the mitre box ; I shall certainly be a bishop . ''
Happy he who had sixpence , for he bid fair to be a judge upon the bench .
And happier he who had a shilling , for he was in the high road to be one day upon the woolsack , Lord High Chancellor of England .
No one had half a crown , or no one would surely have kept it in his pocket upon such an occasion , for he might have been an archbishop , a king , or what he pleased .
Fisher , who like all weak people was extremely credulous , kept his post immovable in the front row all the time , his mouth open , and his stupid eyes fixed upon the gipsy , in whom he felt implicit faith .
Those who have least confidence in their own powers , and who have least expectation from the success of their own exertions , are always most disposed to trust in fortune-tellers and fortune .
They hope to WIN , when they can not EARN ; and as they can never be convinced by those who speak sense , it is no wonder they are always persuaded by those who talk nonsense .
`` I have a question to put , '' said Fisher , in a solemn tone .
`` Put it , then , '' said Archer , `` what hinders you ? ''
`` But they will hear me , '' said he , looking suspiciously at De Grey .
`` _I_ shall not hear you , '' said De Grey , `` I am going . ''
Everybody else drew back , and left him to whisper his question in the gipsy 's ear .
`` What is become of my Livy ? ''
`` Your SISTER Livy , do you mean ? ''
said the gipsy .
`` No , my LATIN Livy . ''
The gipsy paused for information .
`` It had a leaf torn out in the beginning , and I HATE DR .
MIDDLETON -- '' '' Written in it , '' interrupted the gipsy .
`` Right -- the very book ! ''
cried Fisher with joy .
`` But how COULD you know it was Dr .
Middleton 's name ?
I thought I had scratched it , so that nobody could make it out . ''
`` Nobody COULD make it out but ME , '' replied the gipsy .
`` But never think to deceive me , '' said she , shaking her head at him in a manner that made him tremble .
`` I do n't deceive you indeed , I tell you the whole truth .
I lost it a week ago . ''
`` True . ''
`` And when shall I find it ? ''
`` Meet me here at this hour to-morrow evening , and I will answer you .
No more !
I must be gone .
Not a word more to-night . ''
She pulled the shutters towards her , and left the youth in darkness .
All his companions were gone .
He had been so deeply engaged in this conference , that he had not perceived their departure .
He found all the world at supper , but no entreaties could prevail upon him to disclose his secret .
Townsend rallied in vain .
As for Archer , he was not disposed to destroy by ridicule the effect which he saw that the old woman's predictions in his favour had had upon the imagination of many of his little partisans .
He had privately slipped two good shillings into the gipsy 's hand to secure her ; for he was willing to pay any price for ANY means of acquiring power .
The watch-chain had not deceived the gipsy , for Archer was the richest person in the community .
His friends had imprudently supplied him with more money than is usually trusted to boys of his age .
Dr .
Middleton had refused to give him a larger monthly allowance than the rest of his companions ; but he brought to school with him secretly the sum of five guineas .
This appeared to his friends and to himself an inexhaustible treasure .
Riches and talents would , he flattered himself , secure to him that ascendancy of which he was so ambitious .
`` Am I your manager , or not ? ''
was now his question .
`` I scorn to take advantage of a hasty moment ; but since last night you have had time to consider .
If you desire me to be your manager , you shall see what a theatre I will make for you .
In this purse , '' said he , showing through the network a glimpse of the shining treasure -- '' in this purse is Aladdin 's wonderful lamp .
Am I your manager ?
Put it to the vote . ''
It was put to the vote .
About ten of the most reasonable of the assembly declared their gratitude and high approbation of their old friend , De Grey ; but the numbers were in favour of the new friend .
And as no metaphysical distinctions relative to the idea of a majority had ever entered their thoughts , the most numerous party considered themselves as now beyond dispute in the right .
They drew off on one side in triumph , and their leader , who knew the consequence of a name in party matters , immediately distinguished his partisans by the gallant name of ARCHERS , stigmatizing the friends of De Grey by the odious epithet of Greybeards .
Amongst the Archers was a class not very remarkable for their mental qualifications ; but who , by their bodily activity , and by the peculiar advantages annexed to their way of life , rendered themselves of the highest consequence , especially to the rich and enterprising .
The judicious reader will apprehend that I allude to the persons called day scholars .
Amongst these , Fisher was distinguished by his knowledge of all the streets and shops in the adjacent town ; and , though a dull scholar , he had such reputation as a man of business , that whoever had commissions to execute at the confectioner 's , was sure to apply to him .
Some of the youngest of his employers had , it is true , at times complained that he made mistakes of halfpence and pence in their accounts ; but as these affairs could never be brought to a public trial , Fisher 's character and consequence were undiminished , till the fatal day when his Aunt Barbara forbade his visits to the confectioner 's ; or , rather , till she requested the confectioner , who had his private reasons for obeying her , not TO RECEIVE her nephew 's visits , as he had made himself sick at his house , and Mrs .
Barbara 's fears for his health were incessant .
Though his visits to the confectioner 's were thus at an end , there were many other shops open to him ; and with officious zeal he offered his services to the new manager , to purchase whatever might be wanting for the theatre .
Since his father 's death Fisher had become a boarder at Dr .
Middleton 's , but his frequent visits to his Aunt Barbara afforded him opportunities of going into the town .
The carpenter , De Grey 's friend , was discarded by Archer , for having said `` LACK-A-DAISY ! ''
when he saw that the old theatre was pulled down .
A new carpenter and paper hanger , recommended by Fisher , were appointed to attend , with their tools , for orders , at two o'clock .
Archer , impatient to show his ingenuity and his generosity , gave his plan and his orders in a few minutes , in a most decided manner ; '' These things , '' he observed , `` should be done with some spirit . ''
To which the carpenter readily assented , and added , that `` gentlemen of spirit never looked to the EXPENSE , but always to the EFFECT . ''
Upon this principle Mr .
Chip set to work with all possible alacrity .
In a few hours ' time he promised to produce a grand effect .
High expectations were formed .
Nothing was talked of but the new playhouse ; and so intent upon it was every head , that no lessons could be got .
Archer was obliged , in the midst of his various occupations , to perform the part of grammar and dictionary for twenty different people .
`` O ye Athenians ! ''
he exclaimed , `` how hard do I work to obtain your praise ! ''
Impatient to return to the theatre , the moment the hours destined for instruction , or , as they are termed by schoolboys , school-hours , were over , each prisoner started up with a shout of joy .
`` Stop one moment , gentlemen , if you please , '' said Dr .
Middleton , in an awful voice .
`` Mr .
Archer , return to your place .
Are you all here ? ''
The names of all the boys were called over , and when each had answered to his name , Dr .
Middleton said -- '' Gentlemen , I am sorry to interrupt your amusements ; but , till you have contrary orders from me , no one , on pain of my serious displeasure , must go into THAT building '' ( pointing to the place where the theatre was erecting ) .
`` Mr .
Archer , your carpenter is at the door .
You will be so good as to dismiss him .
I do not think proper to give my reasons for these orders ; but you who KNOW me , '' said the doctor , and his eye turned towards De Grey , `` will not suspect me of caprice .
I depend , gentlemen , upon your obedience . ''
To the dead silence with which these orders were received , succeeded in a few minutes a universal groan .
`` So ! ''
said Townsend , `` all our diversion is over . ''
`` So , '' whispered Fisher in the manager 's ear , `` this is some trick of the Greybeard 's .
Did you not observe how he looked at De Grey ? ''
Fired by this thought , which had never entered his mind before , Archer started from his reverie , and striking his hand upon the table , swore that he `` would not be outwitted by any Greybeard in Europe -- no , nor by all of them put together .
The Archers were surely a match for them .
He would stand by them , if they would stand by him , '' he declared , with a loud voice , `` against the whole world , and Dr .
Middleton himself , with 'LITTLE PREMIUMS ' at his right hand . ''
Everybody admired Archer 's spirit , but were a little appalled at the sound of standing against Dr .
Middleton .
`` Why not ? ''
resumed the indignant manager .
`` Neither Dr .
Middleton nor any doctor upon earth shall treat me with injustice .
This , you see , is a stroke at me and my party , and I wo n't bear it . ''
`` Oh , you are mistaken ! ''
said De Grey , who was the only one who dared to oppose reason to the angry orator .
`` It can not be a stroke aimed at 'you and your party , ' for he does not know that you HAVE a party . ''
`` I 'll make him know it , and I 'll make YOU know it , too , '' said Archer .
`` Before I came here you reigned alone , now your reign is over , Mr .
De Grey .
Remember my majority this morning , and your theatre last night . ''
`` He has remembered it , '' said Fisher .
`` You see , the moment he was not to be our manager , we were to have no theatre , no playhouse , no plays .
We must all sit down with our hands before us -- all for 'GOOD REASONS ' of Dr .
Middleton 's , which he does not vouchsafe to tell us . ''
`` I wo n't be governed by any man 's reasons that he wo n't tell me , '' cried Archer .
`` He can not have good reasons , or why not tell them ? ''
`` Nonsense ! ''
said De Grey .
`` WE SHALL NOT SUSPECT HIM OF CAPRICE ! ''
`` Why not ? ''
`` Because we who know him , have never known him capricious . ''
`` Perhaps not .
_I_ know nothing about him , '' said Archer .
`` No , '' said De Grey ; `` for that very reason _I_ speak who do know him .
Do n't be in a passion , Archer . ''
`` I will be in a passion .
I wo n't submit to tyranny .
I wo n't be made a fool of by a few soft words .
You do n't know me , De Grey .
I 'll go through with what I 've begun .
I am manager , and I will be manager ; and you shall see my theatre finished in spite of you , and MY party triumphant . ''
`` Party , '' repeated De Grey .
`` I can not imagine what is in the word 'party' that seems to drive you mad .
We never heard of parties till you came amongst us . ''
`` No ; before I came , I say , nobody dared oppose you ; but I dare ; and I tell you to your face , take care of me -- a warm friend and a bitter enemy is my motto . ''
`` I am not your enemy !
I believe you are out of your senses , Archer ! ''
said he , laughing .
`` Out of my senses !
No ; you are my enemy !
Are you not my rival ?
Did not you win the premium ?
Did not you want to be manager ?
Answer me , are not you , in one word , a Greybeard ? ''
`` You called me a Greybeard , but my name is De Grey , '' said he , still laughing .
`` Laugh on ! ''
cried the other , furiously .
`` Come , ARCHERS , follow me .
WE shall laugh by-and-by , I promise you . ''
At the door Archer was stopped by Mr .
Chip .
`` Oh , Mr .
Chip , I am ordered to discharge you . ''
`` Yes , sir ; and here 's a little bill -- '' '' Bill , Mr .
Chip !
why , you have not been at work for two hours ! ''
`` Not much over , sir ; but if you 'll please to look into it , you 'll see 'tis for a few things you ordered .
The stuff is all laid out and delivered .
The paper and the festoon-bordering for the drawing room scene is cut out , and left yAnder within . ''
`` YAnder , within !
I wish you had not been in such a confounded hurry -- six-and-twenty shillings ! ''
cried he ; `` but I ca n't stay to talk about it now .
I 'll tell you , Mr .
Chip , '' said Archer , lowering his voice , `` what you must do for me , my good fellow . ''
Then , drawing Mr .
Chip aside , he begged him to pull down some of the wood work which had been put up , and to cut it into a certain number of wooden bars , of which he gave him the dimensions , with orders to place them all , when ready , under a haystack , which he pointed out .
Mr .
Chip scrupled and hesitated , and began to talk of `` THE DOCTOR . ''
Archer immediately began to talk of the bill , and throwing down a guinea and a half , the conscientious carpenter pocketed the money directly , and made his bow .
`` Well , Master Archer , '' said he , `` there 's no refusing you nothing .
You have such a way of talking one out of it .
You manage me just like a child . ''
`` Ay , ay ! ''
said Archer , knowing that he had been cheated , and yet proud of managing a carpenter , `` ay , ay !
I know the way to manage everybody .
Let the things be ready in an hour 's time , and hark ' e !
leave your tools by mistake behind you , and a thousand of twenty-penny nails .
Ask no questions , and keep your own counsel like a wise man .
Off with you , and take care of 'THE DOCTOR . ' ''
`` Archers , Archers , to the Archers ' tree !
Follow your leader , '' cried he , sounding his well known whistle as a signal .
His followers gathered round him , and he , raising himself upon the mount at the foot of the tree , counted his numbers , and then , in a voice lower than usual , addressed them thus : -- '' My friends , is there a Greybeard amongst us ?
If there is , let him walk off at once , he has my free leave . ''
No one stirred .
`` Then we are all Archers , and we will stand by one another .
Join hands , my friends . ''
They all joined hands .
`` Promise me not to betray me , and I will go on .
I ask no security but your honour . ''
They all gave their honour to be secret and FAITHFUL , as he called it , and he went on .
`` Did you ever hear of such a thing as a 'BARRING OUT , ' my friends ? ''
They had heard of such a thing , but they had only heard of it .
Archer gave the history of a `` Barring Out , '' in which he had been concerned at his school , in which the boys stood out against the master , and gained their point at last , which was a week 's more holidays at Easter .
* `` But if WE should not succeed , '' said they , `` Dr .
Middleton is so steady ; he never goes back from what he has said . ''
`` Did you ever try to push him back ?
Let us be steady and he 'll tremble .
Tyrants always tremble when -- '' '' Oh , '' interrupted a number of voices ; `` but he is not a tyrant -- is he ? ''
`` All schoolmasters are tyrants -- are not they ? ''
replied Archer ; `` and is not he a schoolmaster ? ''
To this logic there was no answer ; but , still reluctant , they asked , '' What they should GET by a Barring Out ? ''
`` Get ! -- everything ! -- what we want ! -- which is everything to lads of spirit- -victory and liberty !
Bar him out till he repeals his tyrannical law ; till he lets us into our own theatre again , or till he tells us his 'GOOD REASONS ' against it . ''
`` But perhaps he has reasons for not telling us . ''
`` Impossible ! ''
cried Archer , `` that 's the way we are always to be governed by a man in a wig , who says he has good reasons , and ca n't tell them .
Are you fools ?
Go !
go back to De Grey !
I see you are all Greybeards .
Go !
Who goes first ? ''
Nobody would go FIRST .
`` I will have nothing to do with ye , if ye are resolved to be slaves ! ''
`` We wo n't be slaves ! ''
they all exclaimed at once .
`` Then , '' said Archer , `` stand out in the right and be free . ''
* [ This custom of `` BARRING OUT '' was very general ( especially in the northern parts of England ) during the 17th and 18th centuries , and it has been fully described by Brand and other antiquarian writers .
Dr .
Johnson mentions that Addison , while under the tuition of Mr .
Shaw , master of the Lichfield Grammar School , led , and successfully conducted , '' a plan for BARRING OUT his master .
A disorderly privilege , '' says the doctor , `` which , in his time , prevailed in the principal seminaries of education . ''
In the Gentleman 's Magazine of 1828 , Dr .
P. A. Nuttall , under the signature of II .
A. N. , has given a spirited sketch of a `` BARRING OUT '' at the Ormskirk Grammar School , which has since been republished at length ( though without acknowledgment ) , by Sir Henry Ellis , in Bohn 's recent edition of Brand 's `` Popular Antiquities . ''
This operation took place early in the present century , and is interesting from its being , perhaps , the last attempt on record , and also from the circumstance of the writer himself having been one of the juvenile leaders in the daring adventure , '' quo rum pars magna fuit , '' -- Ed . ]
`` THE RIGHT . ''
It would have taken up too much time to examine what `` THE RIGHT '' was .
Archer was always sure that `` THE RIGHT '' was what his party chose to do ; that is , what he chose to do himself ; and such is the influence of numbers upon each other , in conquering the feelings of shame and in confusing the powers of reasoning , that in a few minutes `` the right '' was forgotten , and each said to himself , `` To be sure , Archer is a very clever boy , and he ca n't be mistaken '' ; or , `` to be sure , Townsend thinks so , and he would not do anything to get us into a scrape '' ; or , `` to be sure , everybody will agree to this but myself , and I ca n't stand out alone , to be pointed at as a Greybeard and a slave .
Everybody thinks it is right , and everybody ca n't be wrong . ''
By some of these arguments , which passed rapidly through the mind without his being conscious of them , each boy decided , and deceived himself -- what none would have done alone , none scrupled to do as a party .
It was determined , then , that there should be a Barring Out .
The arrangement of the affair was left to their new manager , to whom they all pledged implicit obedience .
Obedience , it seems , is necessary , even from rebels to their ringleaders ; not reasonable , but implicit obedience .
Scarcely had the assembly adjourned to the Ball-alley , when Fisher , with an important length of face , came up to the manager , and desired to speak one word to him .
`` My advice to you , Archer , is , to do nothing in this till we have consulted , YOU KNOW WHO , about whether it 's right or wrong . ''
`` 'YOU KNOW WHO ! '
Whom do you mean ?
Make haste , and do n't make so many faces , for I 'm in a hurry .
Who is 'YOU KNOW WHO ? ' ''
`` The old woman , '' said Fisher , gravely ; `` the gipsy . ''
`` You may consult the old woman , '' said Archer , bursting out a-laughing , '' about what 's right and wrong , if you please ; but no old woman shall decide for me . ''
`` No ; but you do n't TAKE me , '' said Fisher ; `` you do n't TAKE me .
By right and wrong , I mean lucky and unlucky . ''
`` Whatever _I_ do will be lucky , '' replied Archer .
`` My gipsy told you that already . ''
`` I know , I know , '' said Fisher , `` and what she said about your friends being lucky -- that went a great way with many , '' added he , with a sagacious nod of his head ; `` I can tell you THAT -- more than you think .
Do you know , '' said he , laying hold of Archer 's button , `` I 'm in the secret .
There are nine of us have crooked our little fingers upon it , not to stir a step till we get her advice ; and she has appointed me to meet her about particular business of my own at eight .
So I 'm to consult her and to bring her answer . ''
Archer knew too well how to govern fools , to attempt to reason with them ; and , instead of laughing any longer at Fisher 's ridiculous superstition , he was determined to take advantage of it .
He affected to be persuaded of the wisdom of the measure ; looked at his watch ; urged him to be exact to a moment ; conjured him to remember exactly the words of the oracle ; and , above all things , to demand the lucky hour and minute when the Barring Out should begin .
With these instructions Archer put his watch into the solemn dupe 's hand , and left him to count the seconds , till the moment of his appointment , whilst he ran off himself to prepare the oracle .
At a little gate which looked into a lane , through which he guessed that the gipsy must pass , he stationed himself , saw her , gave her half a crown and her instructions , made his escape , and got back unsuspected to Fisher , whom he found in the attitude in which he had left him , watching the motion of the minute hand .
Proud of his secret commission , Fisher slouched his hat , he knew not why , over his face , and proceeded towards the appointed spot .
To keep , as he had been charged by Archer , within the letter of the law , he stood BEHIND the forbidden building , and waited some minutes .
Through a gap in the hedge the old woman at length made her appearance , muffled up , and looking cautiously about her .
`` There 's nobody near us ! ''
said Fisher , and he began to be a little afraid .
`` What answer , '' said he , recollecting himself , `` about my Livy ? ''
`` Lost !
lost !
lost ! ''
said the gipsy , lifting up her hands ; `` never , never , never to be found !
But no matter for that now ; that is not your errand to-night ; no tricks with me ; speak to me of what is next your heart . ''
Fisher , astonished , put his hand upon his heart , told her all that she knew before , and received the answers that Archer had dictated : `` That the Archers should be lucky as long as they stuck to their manager , and to one another ; that the Barring Out should end in woe , if not begun precisely as the clock should strike nine on Wednesday night ; but if begun in that LUCKY moment , and all obedient to their LUCKY leader , all should end well . ''
A thought , a provident thought , now struck Fisher ; for even he had some foresight where his favourite passion was concerned .
`` Pray , in our Barring Out shall we be starved ? ''
`` No , '' said the gipsy , `` not if you trust to me for food , and if you give me money enough .
Silver wo n't do for so many ; gold is what must cross my hand . ''
`` I have no gold , '' said Fisher , `` and I do n't know what you mean by 'so many . '
I 'm only talking of number one , you know .
I must take care of that first . ''
So , as Fisher thought it was possible that Archer , clever as he was , might be disappointed in his supplies , he determined to take secret measures for himself .
His Aunt Barbara 's interdiction had shut him out of the confectioner 's shop ; but he flattered himself that he could outwit his aunt ; he therefore begged the gipsy to procure him twelve buns by Thursday morning , and bring them secretly to one of the windows of the schoolroom .
As Fisher did not produce any money when he made this proposal , it was at first absolutely rejected ; but a bribe at length conquered his difficulties ; and the bribe which Fisher found himself obliged to give -- for he had no pocket money left of his own , he being as much RESTRICTED in that article as Archer was INDULGED -- the bribe that he found himself obliged to give to quiet the gipsy was half a crown , which Archer had intrusted to him to buy candles for the theatre .
`` Oh , '' thought he to himself ; `` Archer 's so careless about money , he will never think of asking me for the half-crown again ; and now he 'll want no candles for the THEATRE ; or , at anyrate , it will be some time first ; and maybe , Aunt Barbara may be got to give me that much at Christmas ; then , if the worst comes to the worst , one can pay Archer .
My mouth waters for the buns , and have 'em I must now . ''
So , for the hope of twelve buns , he sacrificed the money which had been intrusted to him .
Thus the meanest motives , in mean minds often prompt to the commission of those great faults , to which one should think nothing but some violent passion could have tempted .
The ambassador having thus , in his opinion , concluded his own and the public business , returned well satisfied with the result , after receiving the gipsy 's reiterated promise to tap THREE TIMES at the window on Thursday morning .
The day appointed for the Barring Out at length arrived ; and Archer , assembling the confederates , informed them , that all was prepared for carrying their design into execution ; that he now depended for success upon their punctuality and courage .
He had , within the last two hours , got all their bars ready to fasten the doors and window shutters of the schoolroom ; he had , with the assistance of two of the day scholars who were of the party , sent into the town for provisions , at his own expense , which would make a handsome supper for that night ; he had also negotiated with some cousins of his , who lived in the town , for a constant supply in future .
`` Bless me , '' exclaimed Archer , suddenly stopping in this narration of his services , `` there 's one thing , after all , I 've forgot , we shall be undone without it .
Fisher , pray did you ever buy the candles for the playhouse ? ''
`` No , to be sure , '' replied Fisher , extremely frightened ; `` you know you do n't want candles for the playhouse now . ''
`` Not for the playhouse , but for the Barring Out .
We shall be in the dark , man .
You must run this minute , run . ''
`` For candles ? ''
said Fisher , confused ; `` how many ? -- what sort ? ''
`` Stupidity ! ''
exclaimed Archer , `` you are a pretty fellow at a dead lift !
Lend me a pencil and a bit of paper , do ; I 'll write down what I want myself !
Well , what are you fumbling for ? ''
`` For money ! ''
said Fisher , colouring .
`` Money , man !
Did n't I give you half a crown the other day ? ''
`` Yes , '' replied Fisher , stammering ; `` but I was n't sure that that might be enough . ''
`` Enough !
yes , to be sure it will .
I do n't know what you are AT . ''
`` Nothing , nothing , '' said Fisher , `` here , write upon this , then , '' said Fisher , putting a piece of paper into Archer 's hand , upon which Archer wrote his orders .
`` Away , away ! ''
cried he .
Away went Fisher .
He returned ; but not until a considerable time afterwards .
They were at supper when he returned .
`` Fisher always comes in at supper-time , '' observed one of the Greybeards , carelessly .
`` Well , and would you have him come in AFTER supper-time ? ''
said Townsend , who always supplied his party with ready wit .
`` I 've got the candles , '' whispered Fisher as he passed by Archer to his place .
`` And the tinder-box ? ''
said Archer .
`` Yes ; I got back from my Aunt Barbara under pretence that I must study for repetition day an hour later to-night .
So I got leave .
Was not that clever ? ''
A dunce always thinks it clever to cheat even by SOBER LIES .
How Mr .
Fisher procured the candles and the tinder box without money , and without credit , we shall discover further on .
Archer and his associates had agreed to stay the last in the schoolroom ; and as soon as the Greybeards were gone out to bed , he , as the signal , was to shut and lock one door , Townsend the other .
A third conspirator was to strike a light , in case they should not be able to secure a candle .
A fourth was to take charge of the candle as soon as lighted ; and all the rest were to run to their bars , which were secreted in a room ; then to fix them to the common fastening bars of the window , in the manner in which they had been previously instructed by the manager .
Thus each had his part assigned , and each was warned that the success of the whole depended upon their order and punctuality .
Order and punctuality , it appears , are necessary even in a Barring Out ; and even rebellion must have its laws .
The long expected moment at length arrived .
De Grey and his friends , unconscious of what was going forward , walked out of the schoolroom as usual at bedtime .
The clock began to strike nine .
There was one Greybeard left in the room , who was packing up some of his books , which had been left about by accident .
It is impossible to describe the impatience with which he was watched , especially by Fisher , and the nine who depended upon the gipsy oracle .
When he had got all his books together under his arm , he let one of them fall ; and whilst he stooped to pick it up , Archer gave the signal .
The doors were shut , locked , and double-locked in an instant .
A light was struck and each ran to his post .
The bars were all in the same moment put up to the windows , and Archer , when he had tried them all , and seen that they were secure , gave a loud `` Huzza ! ''
-- in which he was joined by all the party most manfully -- by all but the poor Greybeard , who , the picture of astonishment , stood stock still in the midst of them with his books under his arm ; at which spectacle Townsend , who enjoyed the FROLIC of the fray more than anything else , burst into an immoderate fit of laughter .
`` So , my little Greybeard , '' said he , holding a candle full in his eyes , `` what think you of all this ? -- How came you amongst the wicked ones ? ''
`` I do n't know , indeed , '' said the little boy , very gravely : `` you shut me up amongst you .
Wo n't you let me out ? ''
`` Let you out !
No , no , my little Greybeard , '' said Archer , catching hold of him , and dragging him to the window bars .
`` Look ye here -- touch these- -put your hand to them -- pull , push , kick -- put a little spirit into it , man -- kick like an Archer , if you can ; away with ye .
It 's a pity that the king of the Greybeards is not here to admire me .
I should like to show him our fortifications .
But come , my merry men all , now to the feast .
Out with the table into the middle of the room .
Good cheer , my jolly Archers !
I 'm your manager ! ''
Townsend , delighted with the bustle , rubbed his hands , and capered about the room , whilst the preparations for the feast were hurried forward .
`` Four candles ! -- Four candles on the table .
Let 's have things in style when we are about it , Mr .
Manager , '' cried Townsend .
`` Places ! -- Places !
There 's nothing like a fair scramble , my boys .
Let everyone take care of himself .
Hallo !
Greybeard , I 've knocked Greybeard down here in the scuffle .
Get up again , my lad , and see a little life . ''
`` No , no , '' cried Fisher , `` he sha'n't SUP with us . ''
`` No , no , '' cried the manager , `` he sha n't LIVE with us ; a Greybeard is not fit company for Archers . ''
`` No , no , '' cried Townsend , `` evil communication corrupts good manners . ''
So with one unanimous hiss they hunted the poor little gentle boy into a corner ; and having pent him up with benches , Fisher opened his books for him , which he thought the greatest mortification , and set up a candle beside him -- '' There , now he looks like a Greybeard as he is ! ''
cried they .
`` Tell me what 's the Latin for cold roast beef ? ''
said Fisher , exultingly , and they returned to their feast .
Long and loud they revelled .
They had a few bottles of cider .
`` Give me the corkscrew , the cider sha'n't be kept till it 's sour , '' cried Townsend , in answer to the manager , who , when he beheld the provisions vanishing with surprising rapidity , began to fear for the morrow .
`` Hang to- morrow ! ''
cried Townsend , `` let Greybeards think of to-morrow ; Mr .
Manager , here 's your good health . ''
The Archers all stood up as their cups were filled to drink the health of their chief with a universal cheer .
But at the moment that the cups were at their lips , and as Archer bowed to thank the company , a sudden shower from above astonished the whole assembly .
They looked up , and beheld the rose of a watering-engine , whose long neck appeared through a trap door in the ceiling .
`` Your good health , Mr .
Manager ! ''
said a voice , which was known to be the gardener 's ; and in the midst of their surprise and dismay the candles were suddenly extinguished ; the trap-door shut down ; and they were left in utter darkness .
`` The DEVIL ! ''
said Archer . ''
`` Do n't swear , Mr .
Manager , '' said the same voice from the ceiling , `` I hear every word you say . ''
`` Mercy upon us ! ''
exclaimed Fisher .
`` The clock , '' added he , whispering , '' must have been wrong , for it had not done striking when we began .
Only , you remember , Archer , it had just done before you had done locking your door . ''
`` Hold your tongue , blockhead ! ''
said Archer .
`` Well , boys !
were ye never in the dark before ?
You are not afraid of a shower of rain , I hope .
Is anybody drowned ? ''
`` No , '' said they , with a faint laugh , `` but what shall we do here in the dark all night long , and all day to-morrow ?
We ca n't unbar the shutters . ''
`` It 's a wonder NOBODY ever thought of the trap-door ! ''
said Townsend .
The trap-door had indeed escaped the manager 's observation .
As the house was new to him , and the ceiling being newly white-washed , the opening was scarcely perceptible .
Vexed to be out-generalled , and still more vexed to have it remarked , Archer poured forth a volley of incoherent exclamations and reproaches against those who were thus so soon discouraged by a trifle ; and groping for the tinder-box , he asked if anything could be easier than to strike a light again .
* The light appeared .
But at the moment that it made the tinder-box visible , another shower from above , aimed , and aimed exactly , at the tinder-box , drenched it with water , and rendered it totally unfit for further service .
Archer in a fury dashed it to the ground .
And now for the first time he felt what it was to be the unsuccessful head of a party .
He heard in his turn the murmurs of a discontented , changeable populace ; and recollecting all his bars and bolts , and ingenious contrivances , he was more provoked at their blaming him for this one only oversight than he was grieved at the disaster itself .
* Lucifer matches were then unknown. -- Ed .
`` Oh , my hair is all wet ! ''
cried one , dolefully .
`` Wring it , then , '' said Archer .
`` My hand 's cut with your broken glass , '' cried another .
`` Glass ! ''
cried a third ; `` mercy !
is there broken glass ?
and it 's all about , I suppose , amongst the supper ; and I had but one bit of bread all the time . ''
`` Bread ! ''
cried Archer ; `` eat if you want it .
Here 's a piece here , and no glass near it . ''
`` It 's all wet , and I do n't like dry bread by itself ; that 's no feast . ''
`` Heigh-day !
What , nothing but moaning and grumbling !
If these are the joys of a Barring Out , '' cried Townsend , `` I 'd rather be snug in my bed .
I expected that we should have sat up till twelve o'clock , talking , and laughing , and singing . ''
`` So you may still ; what hinders you ? ''
said Archer .
`` Sing , and we 'll join you , and I should be glad those fellows overhead heard us singing .
Begin , Townsend -- `` 'Come now , all ye social Powers , Spread your influence o'er us ' -- Or else -- `` 'Rule , Britannia !
Britannia rules the waves !
Britons never will be slaves . ' ''
Nothing can be more melancholy than forced merriment .
In vain they roared in chorus .
In vain they tried to appear gay .
It would not do .
The voices died away , and dropped off one by one .
They had each provided himself with a great-coat to sleep upon ; but now , in the dark , there was a peevish scrambling contest for the coats , and half the company , in very bad humour , stretched themselves upon the benches for the night .
There is great pleasure in bearing anything that has the appearance of hardship as long as there is any glory to be acquired by it : but when people feel themselves foiled , there is no further pleasure in endurance ; and if , in their misfortune , there is any mixture of the ridiculous , the motives for heroism are immediately destroyed .
Dr .
Middleton had probably considered this in the choice he made of his first attack .
Archer , who had spent the night as a man who had the cares of government upon his shoulders , rose early in the morning , whilst everybody else was fast asleep .
In the night he had resolved the affair of the trap-door , and a new danger had alarmed him .
It was possible that the enemy might descend upon them through the trap-door .
The room had been built high to admit a free circulation of air .
It was twenty feet , so that it was in vain to think of reaching to the trap-door .
As soon as the daylight appeared , Archer rose softly , that he might RECONNOITRE , and devise some method of guarding against this new danger .
Luckily there were round holes in the top of the window-shutters , which admitted sufficient light for him to work by .
The remains of the soaked feast , wet candles , and broken glass spread over the table in the middle of the room , looked rather dismal this morning .
' A pretty set of fellows I have to manage ! ''
said Archer , contemplating the group of sleepers before him .
`` It is well they have somebody to think for them .
Now if I wanted -- which , thank goodness , I do n't -- but if I did want to call a cabinet council to my assistance , whom could I pitch upon ?
not this stupid snorer , who is dreaming of gipsies , if he is dreaming of anything , '' continued Archer , as he looked into Fisher 's open mouth .
`` This next chap is quick enough ; but , then , he is so fond of having everything his own way .
And this curl pated monkey , who is grinning in his sleep , is all tongue and no brains .
Here are brains , though nobody would think it , in this lump , '' said he , looking at a fat , rolled up , heavy breathing sleeper ; `` but what signify brains to such a lazy dog ?
I might kick him for my football this half hour before I should get him awake .
This lank jawed harlequin beside him is a handy fellow , to be sure ; but , then , if he has hands , he has no head -- and he'd be afraid of his own shadow too , by this light , he is such a coward !
And Townsend , why , he has puns in plenty ; but , when there 's any work to be done , he 's the worst fellow to be near one in the world -- he can do nothing but laugh at his own puns .
This poor little fellow that we hunted into the corner has more sense than all of them put together ; but then he is a Greybeard . ''
Thus speculated the chief of a party upon his sleeping friends .
And how did it happen that he should be so ambitious to please and govern this set , when , for each individual of which it was composed , he felt such supreme contempt ?
He had formed them into a PARTY , had given them a name , and he was at their head .
If these be not good reasons , none better can be assigned for Archer 's conduct .
`` I wish ye could all sleep on , '' said he ; `` but I must waken ye , though you will be only in my way .
The sound of my hammering must waken them ; so I may as well do the thing handsomely , and flatter some of them by pretending to ask their advice . ''
Accordingly , he pulled two or three to waken them .
`` Come , Townsend , waken , my boy !
Here 's some diversion for you -- up !
up ! ''
`` Diversion ! ''
cried Townsend ; `` I 'm your man !
I 'm up -- UP TO ANYTHING . ''
So , under the name of DIVERSION , Archer set Townsend to work at four o'clock in the morning .
They had nails , a few tools , and several spars , still left from the wreck of the playhouse .
These , by Archer's directions , they sharpened at one end , and nailed them to the ends of several forms .
All hands were now called to clear away the supper things , to erect these forms perpendicularly under the trap-door ; and with the assistance of a few braces , a chevaux-de-frise was formed , upon which nobody could venture to descend .
At the farthest end of the room they likewise formed a penthouse of the tables , under which they proposed to breakfast , secure from the pelting storm , if it should again assail them through the trap- door .
They crowded under the penthouse as soon as it was ready , and their admiration of its ingenuity paid the workmen for the job .
`` Lord !
I shall like to see the gardener 's phiz through the trap-door , when he beholds the spikes under him ! ''
cried Townsend .
`` Now for breakfast ! ''
`` Ay , now for breakfast , '' said Archer , looking at his watch ; `` past eight o'clock , and my town boys not come !
I do n't understand this ! ''
Archer had expected a constant supply of provisions from two boys who lived in the town , who were cousins of his , and who had promised to come every day , and put food in at a certain hole in the wall , in which a ventilator usually turned .
This ventilator Archer had taken down , and had contrived it so that it could be easily removed and replaced at pleasure ; but , upon examination , it was now perceived that the hole had been newly stopped up by an iron back , which it was impossible to penetrate or remove .
`` It never came into my head that anybody would ever have thought of the ventilator but myself ! ''
exclaimed Archer , in great perplexity .
He listened and waited for his cousins ; but no cousins came , and at a late hour the company were obliged to breakfast upon the scattered fragments of the last night 's feast .
That feast had been spread with such imprudent profusion , that little now remained to satisfy the hungry guests .
Archer , who well knew the effect which the apprehension of a scarcity would have upon his associates , did everything that could be done by a bold countenance and reiterated assertions to persuade them that his cousins would certainly come at last and that the supplies were only delayed .
The delay , however , was alarming .
Fisher alone heard the manager 's calculations and saw the public fears unmoved .
Secretly rejoicing in his own wisdom , he walked from window to window , slily listening for the gipsy 's signal .
`` There it is ! ''
cried he with more joy sparkling in his eyes than had ever enlightened them before .
`` Come this way , Archer ; but do n't tell anybody .
Hark !
do ye hear those three taps at the window ?
This is the old woman with twelve buns for me .
I 'll give you one whole one for yourself , if you will unbar the window for me . ''
`` Unbar the window ! ''
interrupted Archer ; `` no , that I wo n't , for you or the gipsy either ; but I have heard enough to get your buns without that .
But stay ; there is something of more consequence than your twelve buns .
I must think for ye all , I see , regularly . ''
So he summoned a council , and proposed that everyone should subscribe , and trust the subscription to the gipsy , to purchase a fresh supply of provisions .
Archer laid down a guinea of his own money for his subscription ; at which sight all the company clapped their hands , and his popularity rose to a high pitch with their renewed hopes of plenty .
Now , having made a list of their wants , they folded the money in the paper , put it into a bag , which Archer tied to a long string , and , having broken the pane of glass behind the round hole in the window-shutter , he let down the bag to the gipsy .
She promised to be punctual , and having filled the bag with Fisher 's twelve buns , they were drawn up in triumph , and everybody anticipated the pleasure with which they should see the same bag drawn up at dinner-time .
The buns were a little squeezed in being drawn through the hole in the window-shutter ; but Archer immediately sawed out a piece of the shutter , and broke the corresponding panes in each of the other windows , to prevent suspicion , and to make it appear that they had all been broken to admit air .
What a pity that so much ingenuity should have been employed to no purpose !
It may have surprised the intelligent reader that the gipsy was so punctual to her promise to Fisher , but we must recollect that her apparent integrity was only cunning ; she was punctual that she might be employed again , that she might be intrusted with the contribution which , she foresaw , must be raised amongst the famishing garrison .
No sooner had she received the money than her end was gained .
Dinner-time came ; it struck three , four , five , six .
They listened with hungry ears , but no signal was heard .
The morning had been very long , and Archer had in vain tried to dissuade them from devouring the remainder of the provisions before they were sure of a fresh supply .
And now those who had been the most confident were the most impatient of their disappointment .
Archer , in the division of the food , had attempted , by the most scrupulous exactness , to content the public , and he was both astonished and provoked to perceive that his impartiality was impeached .
So differently do people judge in different situations !
He was the first person to accuse his master of injustice , and the least capable of bearing such an imputation upon himself from others .
He now experienced some of the joys of power , and the delight of managing unreasonable numbers .
`` Have not I done everything I could to please you ?
Have not I spent my money to buy you food ?
Have not I divided the last morsel with you ?
I have not tasted one mouthful today !
Did not I set to work for you at sunrise ?
Did not I lie awake all night for you ?
Have not I had all the labour , and all the anxiety ?
Look round and see MY contrivances , MY work , MY generosity !
And , after all , you think me a tyrant , because I want you to have common sense .
Is not this bun which I hold in my hand my own ?
Did not I earn it by my own ingenuity from that selfish dunce '' ( pointing to Fisher ) , `` who could never have gotten one of his twelve buns , if I had not shown him how ?
Eleven of them he has eaten since morning for his own share , without offering anyone a morsel ; but I scorn to eat even what is justly my own , when I see so many hungry creatures longing for it .
I was not going to touch this last morsel myself .
I only begged you to keep it till supper-time , when perhaps you 'll want it more , and Townsend , who ca n't bear the slightest thing that crosses his own whims , and who thinks there 's nothing in this world to be minded but his own diversion , calls me a TYRANT .
You all of you promised to obey me .
The first thing I ask you to do for your own good , and when , if you had common sense , you must know I can want nothing but your good , you rebel against me .
Traitors !
fools !
ungrateful fools ! ''
Archer walked up and down , unable to command his emotion , whilst , for the moment , the discontented multitude was silenced .
`` Here , '' said he , striking his hand upon the little boy 's shoulder , '' here 's the only one amongst you who has not uttered one word of reproach or complaint , and he has had but one bit of bread -- a bit that I gave him myself this day .
Here ! ''
said he , snatching the bun , which nobody had dared to touch , `` take it -- it 's mine -- I give it to you , though you are a Greybeard ; you deserve it .
Eat it , and be an Archer .
You shall be my captain ; will you ? ''
said he , lifting him up in his arm above the rest .
`` I like you now , '' said the little boy , courageously ; `` but I love De Grey better ; he has always been my friend , and he advised me never to call myself any of those names , Archer or Greybeard ; so I wo n't .
Though I am shut in here , I have nothing to do with it .
I love Dr .
Middleton ; he was never unjust to ME , and I daresay that he has very good reasons , as De Grey said , for forbidding us to go into that house .
Besides , it 's his own . ''
Instead of admiring the good sense and steadiness of this little lad , Archer suffered Townsend to snatch the untasted bun out of his hands .
He flung it at a hole in the window , but it fell back .
The Archers scrambled for it , and Fisher ate it .
Archer saw this , and was sensible that he had not done handsomely in suffering it .
A few moments ago he had admired his own generosity , and though he had felt the injustice of others , he had not accused himself of any .
He turned away from the little boy , and sitting down at one end of the table , hid his face in his hands .
He continued immovable in this posture for some time .
`` Lord ! ''
said Townsend ; `` it was an excellent joke ! ''
`` Pooh ! ''
said Fisher ; `` what a fool , to think so much about a bun ! ''
`` Never mind , Mr .
Archer , if you are thinking about me , '' said the little boy , trying gently to pull his hands from his face .
Archer stooped down , and lifted him up upon the table , at which sight the partisans set up a general hiss .
`` He has forsaken us !
He deserts his party !
He wants to be a Greybeard !
After he has got us all into this scrape , he will leave us ! ''
`` I am not going to leave you , '' cried Archer .
`` No one shall ever accuse me of deserting my party .
I 'll stick by the Archers , right or wrong , I tell you , to the last moment .
But this little fellow -- take it as you please , mutiny if you will , and throw me out of the window .
Call me traitor !
coward !
Greybeard ! -- this little fellow is worth you all put together , and I 'll stand by him against anyone who dares to lay a finger upon him ; and the next morsel of food that I see shall be his .
Touch him who dares ! ''
The commanding air with which Archer spoke and looked , and the belief that the little boy deserved his protection , silenced the crowd .
But the storm was only hushed .
No sound of merriment was now to be heard -- no battledore and shuttlecock- -no ball , no marbles .
Some sat in a corner , whispering their wishes that Archer would unbar the doors , and give up .
Others , stretching their arms , and gaping as they sauntered up and down the room , wished for air , or food , or water .
Fisher and his nine , who had such firm dependence upon the gipsy , now gave themselves up to utter despair .
It was eight o'clock , growing darker and darker every minute , and no candles , no light could they have .
The prospect of another long dark night made them still more discontented .
Townsend , at the head of the yawners , and Fisher , at the head of the hungry malcontents , gathered round Archer and the few yet unconquered spirits , demanding `` How long he meant to keep them in this dark dungeon ?
and whether he expected that they should starve themselves for his sake ? ''
The idea of GIVING UP was more intolerable to Archer than all the rest .
He saw that the majority , his own convincing argument , was against him .
He was therefore obliged to condescend to the arts of persuasion .
He flattered some with hopes of food from the town boys .
Some he reminded of their promises ; others he praised for former prowess ; and others he shamed by the repetition of their high vaunts in the beginning of the business .
It was at length resolved that at all events they WOULD HOLD OUT .
With this determination they stretched themselves again to sleep , for the second night , in weak and weary obstinacy .
Archer slept longer and more soundly than usual the next morning , and when he awoke , he found his hands tied behind him !
Three or four boys had just got hold of his feet , which they pressed down , whilst the trembling hands of Fisher were fastening the cord round them .
With all the force which rage could inspire , Archer struggled and roared to `` HIS ARCHERS ! ''
-- his friends , his party -- for help against the traitors .
But all kept aloof .
Townsend , in particular , stood laughing and looking on .
`` I beg your pardon , Archer , but really you look so droll .
All alive and kicking !
Do n't be angry .
I 'm so weak , I can not help laughing today . ''
The packthread cracked .
`` His hands are free !
He 's loose ! ''
cried the least of the boys , and ran away , whilst Archer leaped up , and seizing hold of Fisher with a powerful grasp , sternly demanded `` What he meant by this ? ''
`` Ask my party , '' said Fisher , terrified ; `` they set me on ; ask my party . ''
`` Your party ! ''
cried Archer , with a look of ineffable contempt ; `` you reptile ! -- YOUR party ?
Can such a thing as YOU have a party ? ''
`` To be sure ! ''
said Fisher , settling his collar , which Archer in his surprise had let go ; `` to be sure !
Why not ?
Any man who chooses it may have a party as well as yourself , I suppose .
I have nine Fishermen . ''
At these words , spoken with much sullen importance , Archer , in spite of his vexation , could not help laughing .
`` Fishermen ! ''
cried he , '' FISHERMEN ! ''
`` And why not Fishermen as well as Archers ? ''
cried they .
`` One party is just as good as another ; it is only a question which can get the upper hand ; and we had your hands tied just now . ''
`` That 's right , Townsend , '' said Archer , `` laugh on , my boy !
Friend or foe , it 's all the same to you .
I know how to value your friendship now .
You are a mighty good fellow when the sun shines ; but let a storm come , and how you slink away ! ''
At this instant , Archer felt the difference between A GOOD COMPANION and a good friend , a difference which some people do not discover till late in life .
`` Have I no friend ? -- no real friend amongst you all ?
And could ye stand by , and see my hands tied behind me like a thief 's ?
What signifies such a party -- all mute ? ''
`` We want something to eat , '' answered the Fishermen .
`` What signifies SUCH a party , indeed ?
and SUCH a manager , who can do nothing for one ? ''
`` And have _I_ done nothing ? ''
`` Do n't let 's hear any more prosing , '' said Fisher ; `` we are too many for you .
I 've advised my party , if they 've a mind not to be starved , to give you up for the ringleader , as you were ; and Dr .
Middleton will not let us all off , I daresay . ''
So , depending upon the sullen silence of the assembly , he again approached Archer with a cord .
A cry of `` No , no , no !
Do n't tie him , '' was feebly raised .
Archer stood still , but the moment Fisher touched him he knocked him down to the ground , and turning to the rest , with eyes sparkling with indignation , `` Archers ! ''
cried he .
A voice at this instant was heard at the door .
It was De Grey 's voice .
`` I have got a large basket of provisions for your breakfast . ''
A general shout of joy was sent forth by the voracious public .
`` Breakfast !
Provisions !
A large basket !
De Grey for ever !
Huzza ! ''
De Grey promised , upon his honour , that if he would unbar the door nobody should come in with him , and no advantage should be taken of them .
This promise was enough even for Archer .
`` I will let him in , '' said he , '' myself ; for I 'm sure he 'll never break his word . ''
He pulled away the bar ; the door opened , and having bargained for the liberty of Melson , the little boy , who had been shut in by mistake , De Grey entered with his basket of provisions , when he locked and barred the door instantly .
Joy and gratitude sparkled in every face when he unpacked his basket , and spread the table with a plentiful breakfast .
A hundred questions were asked him at once .
`` Eat first , '' said he , `` and we will talk afterwards . ''
This business was quickly despatched by those who had not tasted food for a long while .
Their curiosity increased as their hunger diminished .
`` Who sent us breakfast ?
Does Dr .
Middleton know ? ''
were questions reiterated from every mouth .
`` He does know , '' answered De Grey ; `` and the first thing I have to tell you is , that I am your fellow-prisoner .
I am to stay here till you give up .
This was the only condition on which Dr .
Middleton would allow me to bring you food , and he will allow no more . ''
Everyone looked at the empty basket .
But Archer , in whom half vanquished party spirit revived with the strength he had got from his breakfast , broke into exclamations in praise of De Grey 's magnanimity , as he now imagined that De Grey had become one of themselves .
`` And you will join us , will you ?
That 's a noble fellow ! ''
`` No , '' answered De Grey , calmly ; `` but I hope to persuade , or rather to convince you , that you ought to join me . ''
`` You would have found it no hard task to have persuaded or convinced us , whichever you pleased , '' said Townsend , `` if you had appealed to Archers fasting ; but Archers feasting are quite other animals .
Even Caesar himself , after breakfast , is quite another thing ! ''
added he , pointing to Archer .
`` You may speak for yourself , Mr .
Townsend , '' replied the insulted hero , '' but not for me , or for Archers in general , if you please .
We unbarred the door upon the faith of De Grey 's promise -- THAT was not giving up .
And it would have been just as difficult , I promise you , to persuade or convince me either that I should give up against my honour before breakfast as after . ''
This spirited speech was applauded by many , who had now forgotten the feelings of famine .
Not so Fisher , whose memory was upon this occasion very distinct .
`` What nonsense , '' and the orator paused for a synonymous expression , but none was at hand .
`` What nonsense and -- nonsense is here !
Why , do n't you remember that dinner-time , and supper-time and breakfast-time will come again ?
So what signifies mouthing about persuading and convincing ?
We will not go through again what we did yesterday !
Honour me no honour .
I do n't understand it .
I 'd rather be flogged at once , as I have been many 's the good time for a less thing .
I say , we 'd better all be flogged at once , which must be the end of it sooner or later , than wait here to be without dinner , breakfast , and supper , all only because Mr .
Archer wo n't give up because of his honour and nonsense ! ''
Many prudent faces amongst the Fishermen seemed to deliberate at the close of this oration , in which the arguments were brought so `` home to each man 's business and bosom . ''
`` But , '' said De Grey , `` when we yield , I hope it will not be merely to get our dinner , gentlemen .
When we yield , Archer -- '' '' Do n't address yourself to me , '' interrupted Archer , struggling with his pride ; `` you have no further occasion to try to win me .
I have no power , no party , you see !
And now I find that I have no friends , I do n't care what becomes of myself .
I suppose I 'm to be given up as a ringleader .
Here 's this Fisher , and a party of his Fishermen , were going to tie me hand and foot , if I had not knocked him down , just as you came to the door , De Grey ; and now perhaps you will join Fisher 's party against me . ''
De Grey was going to assure him that he had no intention of joining any party , when a sudden change appeared on Archer 's countenance .
`` Silence ! ''
cried Archer , in an imperious tone , and there was silence .
Someone was heard to whistle the beginning of a tune , that was perfectly new to everybody present , except to Archer , who immediately whistled the conclusion .
`` There ! ''
cried he , looking at De Grey , with triumph ; `` that's a method of holding secret correspondence whilst a prisoner , which I learned from 'Richard Coeur de Lion . '
I know how to make use of everything .
Hallo !
friend !
are you there at last ? ''
cried he , going to the ventilator .
`` Yes , but we are barred out here . ''
`` Round to the window then , and fill our bag .
We 'll let it down , my lad , in a trice ; bar me out who can ! ''
Archer let down the bag with all the expedition of joy , and it was filled with all the expedition of fear .
`` Pull away !
make haste , for Heaven's sake ! ''
said the voice from without ; `` the gardener will come from dinner , else , and we shall be caught .
He mounted guard all yesterday at the ventilator ; and though I watched and watched till it was darker than pitch , I could not get near you .
I do n't know what has taken him out of the way now .
Make haste , pull away ! ''
The heavy bag was soon pulled up .
`` Have you any more ? ''
said Archer .
`` Yes , plenty .
Let down quick !
I 've got the tailor 's bag full , which is three times as large as yours , and I 've changed clothes with the tailor's boy ; so nobody took notice of me as I came down the street . ''
`` There 's my own cousin ! ''
exclaimed Archer , `` there 's a noble fellow !
there 's my own cousin , I acknowledge .
Fill the bag , then . ''
Several times the bag descended and ascended ; and at every unlading of the crane , fresh acclamations were heard .
`` I have no more ! ''
at length the boy with the tailor 's bag cried .
`` Off with you , then ; we 've enough , and thank you . ''
A delightful review was now made of their treasure .
Busy hands arranged and sorted the heterogeneous mass .
Archer , in the height of his glory , looked on , the acknowledged master of the whole .
Townsend , who , in his prosperity as in adversity , saw and enjoyed the comic foibles of his friends , pushed De Grey , who was looking on with a more good-natured and more thoughtful air .
`` Friend , '' said he , `` you look like a great philosopher , and Archer a great hero . ''
`` And you , Townsend , '' said Archer , `` may look like a wit , if you will ; but you will never be a hero . ''
`` No , no , '' replied Townsend ; `` wits were never heroes , because they are wits .
You are out of your wits , and therefore may set up for a hero . ''
`` Laugh , and welcome .
I 'm not a tyrant .
I do n't want to restrain anybody 's wit ; but I can not say I admire puns . ''
`` Nor I , either , '' said the time serving Fisher , sidling up to the manager , and picking the ice off a piece of plum-cake , `` nor I either ; I hate puns .
I can never understand Townsend 's PUNS .
Besides , anybody can make puns ; and one does n't want wit , either , at all times ; for instance , when one is going to settle about dinner , or business of consequence .
Bless us all , Archer ! ''
continued he , with sudden familiarity ; `` WHAT A SIGHT OF GOOD THINGS ARE HERE !
I 'm sure we are much obliged to you and your cousin .
I never thought he 'd have come .
Why , now we can hold out as long as you please .
Let us see , '' said he , dividing the provisions upon the table ; '' we can hold out to-day , and all to-morrow , and part of next day , maybe .
Why , now we may defy the doctor and the Greybeards .
The doctor will surely give up to us ; for , you see , he knows nothing of all this , and he 'll think we are starving all this while ; and he 'd be afraid , you see , to let us starve quite , in reality , for three whole days , because of what would be said in the town .
My Aunt Barbara , for one , would be AT HIM long before that time was out ; and besides , you know , in that case , he'd be hanged for murder , which is quite another thing , in law , from a BARRING OUT , you know . ''
Archer had not given to this harangue all the attention which it deserved , for his eye was fixed upon De Grey .
`` What is De Grey thinking of ? ''
he asked , impatiently .
`` I am thinking , '' said De Grey , `` that Dr .
Middleton must believe that I have betrayed his confidence in me .
The gardener was ordered away from his watch-post for one half-hour when I was admitted .
This half-hour the gardener has made nearly a hour .
I never would have come near you if I had foreseen all this .
Dr .
Middleton trusted me , and now he will repent of his confidence in me . ''
`` De Grey ! ''
cried Archer , with energy , `` he shall not repent of his confidence in you -- nor shall you repent of coming amongst us .
You shall find that we have some honour as well as yourself , and I will take care of your honour as if it were my OWN ! ''
`` Hey-day ! ''
interrupted Townsend ; `` are heroes allowed to change sides , pray ?
And does the chief of the Archers stand talking sentiment to the chief of the Greybeards ?
In the middle of his own party too ! ''
`` Party ! ''
repeated Archer , disdainfully ; `` I have done with parties !
I see what parties are made of !
I have felt the want of a friend , and I am determined to make one if I can . ''
`` That you may do , '' said De Grey , stretching out his hand .
`` Unbar the doors !
unbar the windows ! ''
exclaimed Archer .
`` Away with all these things !
I give up for De Grey 's sake .
He shall not lose his credit on my account . ''
`` No , '' said De Grey , `` you shall not give up for my sake . ''
`` Well , then , I 'll give up to do what is HONOURABLE , '' said Archer .
`` Why not to do what is REASONABLE ? ''
said De Grey .
`` REASONABLE !
Oh , the first thing that a man of spirit should think of is , what is HONOURABLE . ''
`` But how will he find out WHAT IS honourable , unless he can reason ? ''
replied De Grey .
`` Oh , '' said Archer , `` his own feelings always tell him what is honourable . ''
`` Have not YOUR FEELINGS , '' asked De Grey , `` changed within these few hours ? ''
`` Yes , with circumstances , '' replied Archer ; `` but right or wrong , as long as I think it honourable to do so and so , I 'm satisfied . ''
`` But you can not think anything honourable , or the contrary , '' observed De Grey , `` without reasoning ; and as to what you call feeling , it 's only a quick sort of reasoning . ''
`` The quicker , the better , '' said Archer .
`` Perhaps not , '' said De Grey .
`` We are apt to reason best when we are not in quite so great a hurry . ''
`` But , '' said Archer , `` we have not always time enough to reason AT FIRST . ''
`` You must , however , acknowledge , '' replied De Grey , smiling , `` that no man but a fool thinks it honourable to be in the wrong AT LAST .
Is it not , therefore , best to begin by reasoning to find out the right AT FIRST ? ''
`` To be sure , '' said Archer .
`` And did you reason with yourself at first ?
And did you find out that it was right to bar Dr .
Middleton out of his own schoolroom , because he desired you not to go into one of his own houses ? ''
`` No , '' replied Archer ; `` but I should never have thought of heading a Barring Out , if he had not shown partiality ; and if you had flown into a passion with me openly at once for pulling down your scenery , which would have been quite natural , and not have gone slily and forbid us the house out of revenge , there would have been none of this work . ''
`` Why , '' said De Grey , `` should you suspect me of such a mean action , when you have never seen or known me do anything mean , and when in this instance you have no proofs ? ''
`` Will you give me your word and honour now , De Grey , before everybody here , that you did not do what I suspected ? ''
`` I do assure you , upon my honour , I never , indirectly , spoke to Dr .
Middleton about the playhouse . ''
`` Then , '' said Archer , `` I 'm as glad as if I had found a thousand pounds !
Now you are my friend indeed . ''
`` And Dr .
Middleton -- why should you suspect him without reason any more than me ? ''
`` As to that , '' said Archer , `` he is your friend , and you are right to defend him ; and I wo n't say another word against him .
Will that satisfy you ? ''
`` Not quite . ''
`` Not quite !
Then , indeed you are unreasonable ! ''
`` No , '' replied De Grey ; `` for I do n't wish you to yield out of friendship to me , any more than to honour .
If you yield to reason , you will be governed by reason another time . ''
`` Well ; but then do n't triumph over me , because you have the best side of the argument . ''
`` Not I !
How can I ? ''
said De Grey ; `` for now you are on THE BEST SIDE as well as myself , are not you ?
So we may triumph together . ''
`` You are a good friend ! ''
said Archer ; and with great eagerness he pulled down the fortifications , whilst every hand assisted .
The room was restored to order in a few minutes -- the shutters were thrown open , the cheerful light let in .
The windows were thrown up , and the first feeling of the fresh air was delightful .
The green playgound opened before them , and the hopes of exercise and liberty brightened the countenances of these voluntary prisoners .
But , alas !
they were not yet at liberty .
The idea of Dr .
Middleton , and the dread of his vengeance , smote their hearts .
When the rebels had sent an ambassador with their surrender , they stood in pale and silent suspense , waiting for their doom .
`` Ah ! ''
said Fisher , looking up at the broken panes in the windows , `` the doctor will think the most of THAT -- he 'll never forgive us for that . ''
`` Hush !
here he comes ! ''
His steady step was heard approaching nearer and nearer .
Archer threw open the door , and Dr .
Middleton entered .
Fisher instantly fell on his knees .
`` It is no delight to me to see people on their knees .
Stand up , Mr .
Fisher .
I hope you are all conscious that you have done wrong ? ''
`` Sir , '' said Archer , `` they are conscious that they have done wrong , and so am I. I am the ringleader .
Punish me as you think proper .
I submit .
Your punishments -- your vengeance ought to fall on me alone ! ''
`` Sir , '' said Dr .
Middleton , calmly , `` I perceive that whatever else you may have learned in the course of your education , you have not been taught the meaning of the word punishment .
Punishment and vengeance do not with us mean the same thing .
PUNISHMENT is pain given , with the reasonable hope of preventing those on whom it is inflicted from doing , IN FUTURE , what will hurt themselves or others .
VENGEANCE never looks to the FUTURE , but is the expression of anger for an injury that is past .
I feel no anger ; you have done me no injury . ''
Here many of the little boys looked timidly up to the windows .
`` Yes , I see that you have broken my windows ; that is a small evil . ''
`` Oh , sir !
How good !
How merciful ! ''
exclaimed those who had been most panic-struck .
`` He forgives us ! ''
`` Stay , '' resumed Dr .
Middleton ; `` I can not forgive you .
I shall never revenge , but it is my duty to punish .
You have rebelled against the just authority which is necessary to conduct and govern you whilst you have not sufficient reason to govern and conduct yourselves .
Without obedience to the laws , '' added he , turning to Archer , `` as men , you can not be suffered in society .
You , sir , think yourself a man , I observe ; and you think it the part of a man not to submit to the will of another .
I have no pleasure in making others , whether men or children , submit to my WILL ; but my reason and experience are superior to yours .
Your parents at least think so , or they would not have intrusted me with the care of your education .
As long as they do intrust you to my care , and as long as I have any hopes of making you wiser and better by punishment , I shall steadily inflict it , whenever I judge it to be necessary , and I judge it to be necessary NOW .
This is a long sermon , Mr .
Archer , not preached to show my own eloquence , but to convince your understanding .
Now , as to your punishment ! ''
`` Name it , sir , '' said Archer ; `` whatever it is , I will cheerfully submit to it . ''
`` Name it yourself , '' said Dr .
Middleton , `` and show me that you now understand the nature of punishment . ''
Archer , proud to be treated like a reasonable creature , and sorry that he had behaved like a foolish schoolboy , was silent for some time , but at length replied , `` That he would rather not name his own punishment . ''
He repeated , however , that he trusted he should bear it well , whatever it might be .
`` I shall , then , '' said Dr .
Middleton , `` deprive you , for two months , of pocket-money , as you have had too much , and have made a bad use of it . ''
`` Sir , '' said Archer , `` I brought five guineas with me to school .
This guinea is all that I have left . ''
Dr .
Middleton received the guinea which Archer offered him with a look of approbation , and told him that it should be applied to the repairs of the schoolroom .
The rest of the boys waited in silence for the doctor's sentence against them , but not with those looks of abject fear with which boys usually expect the sentence of a schoolmaster .
`` You shall return from the playground , all of you , '' said Dr .
Middleton , '' one quarter of an hour sooner , for two months to come , than the rest of your companions .
A bell shall ring at the appointed time .
I give you an opportunity of recovering my confidence by your punctuality . ''
`` Oh , sir !
we will come the instant , the very instant the bell rings ; you shall have confidence in us , '' cried they , eagerly .
`` I deserve your confidence , I hope , '' said Dr .
Middleton ; `` for it is my first wish to make you all happy .
You do not know the pain that it has cost me to deprive you of food for so many hours . ''
Here the boys , with one accord , ran to the place where they had deposited their last supplies .
Archer delivered them up to the doctor , proud to show that they were not reduced to obedience merely by necessity .
`` The reason , '' resumed Dr .
Middleton , having now returned to the usual benignity of his manner -- '' the reason why I desired that none of you should go to that building , '' pointing out of the window , `` was this : -- I had been informed that a gang of gipsies had slept there the night before I spoke to you , one of whom was dangerously ill of a putrid fever .
I did not choose to mention my reason to you or your friends .
I have had the place cleaned , and you may return to it when you please .
The gipsies were yesterday removed from the town . ''
`` De Grey , you were in the right , '' whispered Archer , `` and it was I that was UNJUST . ''
`` The old woman , '' continued the doctor , `` whom you employed to buy food , has escaped the fever , but she has not escaped a gaol , whither she was sent yesterday , for having defrauded you of your money .
`` Mr .
Fisher , '' said Dr .
Middleton , `` as to you , I shall not punish you ; I have no hope of making you either wiser or better .
Do you know this paper ? ''
-- the paper appeared to be a bill for candles and a tinder-box .
`` I desired him to buy those things , sir , '' said Archer , colouring .
`` And did you desire him not to pay for them ? ''
`` No , '' said Archer , `` he had half a crown on purpose to pay for them . ''
`` I know he had , but he chose to apply it to his private use , and gave it to the gipsy to buy twelve buns for his own eating .
To obtain credit for the tinder-box and candles , he made use of THIS name , '' said he , turning to the other side of the bill , and pointing to De Grey 's name , which was written at the end of a copy of one of De Grey 's exercises .
`` I assure you , sir -- '' cried Archer .
`` You need not assure me , sir , '' said Dr .
Middleton ; `` I can not suspect a boy of your temper of having any part in so base an action .
When the people in the shop refused to let Mr .
Fisher have the things without paying for them , he made use of De Grey 's name , who was known there .
Suspecting some mischief , however , from the purchase of the tinder-box , the shopkeeper informed me of the circumstance .
Nothing in this whole business gave me half so much pain as I felt , for a moment , when I suspected that De Grey was concerned in it . ''
A loud cry , in which Archer 's voice was heard most distinctly , declared De Grey 's innocence .
Dr .
Middleton looked round at their eager , honest faces , with benevolent approbation .
`` Archer , '' said he , taking him by the hand , `` I am heartily glad to see that you have got the better of your party spirit .
I wish you may keep such a friend as you have now beside you ; one such friend is worth two such parties .
As for you , Mr .
Fisher , depart ; you must never return hither again . ''
In vain he solicited Archer and De Grey to intercede for him .
Everybody turned away with contempt ; and he sneaked out , whimpering in a doleful voice , `` What shall I say to my Aunt Barbara ? ''
THE BRACELETS .
In a beautiful and retired part of England lived Mrs .
Villars , a lady whose accurate understanding , benevolent heart , and steady temper peculiarly fitted her for the most difficult , as well as most important , of all occupations -- the education of youth .
This task she had undertaken ; and twenty young persons were put under her care , with the perfect confidence of their parents .
No young people could be happier ; they were good and gay , emulous , but not envious of each other ; for Mrs .
Villars was impartially just ; her praise they felt to be the reward of merit , and her blame they knew to be the necessary consequence of ill- conduct .
To the one , therefore , they patiently submitted , and in the other consciously rejoiced .
They rose with fresh cheerfulness in the morning , eager to pursue their various occupations .
They returned in the evening with renewed ardour to their amusements , and retired to rest satisfied with themselves and pleased with each other .
Nothing so much contributed to preserve a spirit of emulation in this little society as a small honorary distinction , given annually , as a prize of successful application .
The prize this year was peculiarly dear to each individual , as it was the picture of a friend whom they dearly loved .
It was the picture of Mrs .
Villars in a small bracelet .
It wanted neither gold , pearls nor precious stones to give it value .
The two foremost candidates for this prize were Cecilia and Leonora .
Cecilia was the most intimate friend of Leonora ; but Leonora was only the favourite companion of Cecilia .
Cecilia was of an active , ambitious , enterprising disposition , more eager in the pursuit than happy in the enjoyment of her wishes .
Leonora was of a contented , unaspiring temperate character ; not easily roused to action , but indefatigable when once excited .
Leonora was proud ; Cecilia was vain .
Her vanity made her more dependent upon the approbation of others , and therefore more anxious to please than Leonora ; but that very vanity made her , at the same time , more apt to offend .
In short , Leonora was the most anxious to avoid what was wrong ; Cecilia , the most ambitious to do what was right .
Few of her companions loved , but many were led by Cecilia , for she was often successful .
Many loved Leonora , but none were ever governed by her , for she was too indolent to govern .
On the first day of May , about six o'clock in the evening , a great bell rang , to summon this little society into a hall , where the prize was to be decided .
A number of small tables were placed in a circle in the middle of the hall .
Seats for the young competitors were raised one above another , in a semicircle , some yards distant from the table , and the judges ' chairs , under canopies of lilacs and laburnums , forming another semicircle , closed the amphitheatre .
Everyone put their writings , their drawings , their works of various kinds upon the tables appropriated for each .
How unsteady were the last steps to these tables !
How each little hand trembled as it laid down its claims !
Till this moment everyone thought herself secure of success ; and the heart , which exulted with hope , now palpitated with fear .
The works were examined , the preference adjudged , and the prize was declared to be the happy Cecilia 's .
Mrs .
Villars came forward , smiling , with the bracelet in her hand .
Cecilia was behind her companions , on the highest row .
All the others gave way , and she was on the floor in an instant .
Mrs .
Villars clasped the bracelet on her arm ; the clasp was heard through the whole hall , and a universal smile of congratulation followed .
Mrs .
Villars kissed Cecilia 's little hand .
`` And now , '' said she , `` go and rejoice with your companions ; the remainder of the day is yours . ''
Oh !
you whose hearts are elated with success , whose bosoms beat high with joy in the moment of triumph , command yourselves .
Let that triumph be moderate , that it may be lasting .
Consider , that though you are good , you may be better ; and , though wise , you may be weak .
As soon as Mrs .
Villars had given her the bracelet , all Cecilia 's little companions crowded round her , and they all left the hall in an instant .
She was full of spirits and vanity .
She ran on .
Running down the flight of steps which led to the garden , in her violent haste , Cecilia threw down the little Louisa , who had a china mandarin in her hand , which her mother had sent her that very morning , and which was all broken to pieces by her fall .
`` Oh , my mandarin ! ''
cried Louisa , bursting into tears .
The crowd behind Cecilia suddenly stopped .
Louisa sat on the lowest step , fixing her eyes upon the broken pieces .
Then , turning round , she hid her face in her hands upon the step above her .
In turning , Louisa threw down the remains of the mandarin .
The head , which she placed in the socket , fell from the shoulders , and rolled , bounding along the gravel walk .
Cecilia pointed to the head and to the socket , and burst into laughter .
The crowd behind laughed , too .
At any other time they would have been more inclined to cry with Louisa ; but Cecilia had just been successful , and sympathy with the victorious often makes us forget justice .
Leonora , however , preserved her usual consistency .
`` Poor Louisa ! ''
said she , looking first at her , and then reproachfully at Cecilia .
Cecilia turned sharply round , colouring , half with shame and half with vexation .
`` I could not help it , Leonora , '' said she .
`` But you could have helped laughing , Cecilia . ''
`` I did n't laugh at Louisa ; and I surely may laugh , for it does nobody any harm . ''
`` I am sure , however , '' replied Leonora , `` I should not have laughed if I had -- '' '' No , to be sure , you would n't , because Louisa is your favourite .
I can buy her another mandarin when the old peddler comes to the door , if that 's all .
I CAN do no more , CAN I ? ''
said she , again turning round to her companions .
`` No , to be sure , '' said they ; `` that 's all fair . ''
Cecilia looked triumphantly at Leonora .
Leonora let go her hand ; she ran on , and the crowd followed .
When she got to the end of the garden , she turned round to see if Leonora had followed her , too ; but was vexed to see her still sitting on the steps with Louisa .
`` I 'm sure I can do no more than buy her another , CAN I ! ''
said she , again appealing to her companions .
`` No , to be sure , '' said they , eager to begin their play .
How many games did these juvenile playmates begin and leave off , before Cecilia could be satisfied with any !
Her thoughts were discomposed , and her mind was running upon something else .
No wonder , then , that she did not play with her usual address .
She grew still more impatient .
She threw down the ninepins .
`` Come , let us play at something else -- at threading the needle , '' said she , holding out her hand .
They all yielded to the hand which wore the bracelet .
But Cecilia , dissatisfied with herself , was discontented with everybody else .
Her tone grew more and more peremptory .
One was too rude , another too stiff ; one too slow , another too quick ; in short everything went wrong , and everybody was tired of her humours .
The triumph of SUCCESS is absolute , but short .
Cecilia 's companions at length recollected that though she had embroidered a tulip , and painted a peach , better than they , yet that they could play as well , and keep their tempers better ; for she was discomposed .
Walking towards the house in a peevish mood , Cecilia met Leonora , but passed on .
`` Cecilia ! ''
cried Leonora .
`` Well , what do you want with me ? ''
`` Are we friends ? ''
`` You know best , '' said Cecilia .
`` We are , if you will let me tell Louisa that you are sorry -- '' Cecilia , interrupting her , `` Oh , pray let me hear no more about Louisa ! ''
`` What !
not confess that you were in the wrong ?
Oh , Cecilia !
I had a better opinion of you . ''
`` Your opinion is of no consequence to me now , for you do n't love me . ''
`` No ; not when you are unjust , Cecilia . ''
`` Unjust !
I am not unjust ; and if I were , you are not my governess . ''
`` No , but am not I your friend ? ''
`` I do n't desire to have such a friend , who would quarrel with me for happening to throw down little Louisa .
How could I tell that she had a mandarin in her hand ?
and when it was broken , could I do more than promise her another ; was that unjust ? ''
`` But you know , Cecilia -- '' '' I KNOW , '' ironically .
`` I know , Leonora , that you love Louisa better than you love me ; that 's the injustice ! ''
`` If I did , '' replied Leonora , gravely , `` it would be no injustice , if she deserved it better . ''
`` How can you compare Louisa to me ! ''
exclaimed Cecilia , indignantly .
Leonora made no answer ; for she was really hurt at her friend 's conduct .
She walked on to join the rest of her companions .
They were dancing in a round upon the grass .
Leonora declined dancing ; but they prevailed upon her to sing for them .
Her voice was not so sprightly , but it was sweeter than usual .
Who sang so sweetly as Leonora ?
or who danced so nimbly as Louisa ?
Away she was flying , all spirits and gaiety , when Leonora 's eyes full of tears , caught hers .
Louisa silently let go her companion 's hand , and , quitting the dance , ran up to Leonora to inquire what was the matter with her .
`` Nothing , '' replied she , `` that need interrupt you .
Go , my dear ; go and dance again . ''
Louisa immediately ran away to her garden , and pulling off her little straw hat , she lined it with the freshest strawberry-leaves , and was upon her knees before the strawberry-bed when Cecilia came by .
Cecilia was not disposed to be pleased with Louisa at that instant , for two reasons ; because she was jealous of her , and because she had injured her .
The injury , however , Louisa had already forgotten .
Perhaps to tell things just as they were , she was not quite so much inclined to kiss Cecilia as she would have been before the fall of her mandarin ; but this was the utmost extent of her malice , if it can be called malice .
`` What are you doing there , little one ? ''
said Cecilia , in a sharp tone .
`` Are you eating your early strawberries here all alone ? ''
`` No , '' said Louisa , mysteriously , `` I am not eating them . ''
`` What are you doing with them ?
ca n't you answer , then ?
I 'm not playing with you , child ! ''
`` Oh , as to that , Cecilia , you know I need not answer you unless I choose it ; not but what I would if you would only ask me civilly , and if you would not call me CHILD . ''
`` Why should not I call you child ? ''
`` Because -- because -- I do n't know ; but I wish you would stand out of my light , Cecilia , for you are trampling upon all my strawberries . ''
`` I have not touched one , you covetous little creature ! ''
`` Indeed -- indeed , Cecilia , I am not covetous .
I have not eaten one of them ; they are all for your friend Leonora .
See how unjust you are ! ''
`` Unjust !
that 's a cant word which you learnt of my friend Leonora , as you call her ; but she is not my friend now . ''
`` Not your friend now ! ''
exclaimed Louisa ; `` then I am sure you must have done something VERY naughty . ''
`` How ? ''
cried Cecilia , catching hold of her .
`` Let me go , let me go ! ''
cried Louisa , struggling .
`` I wo n't give you one of my strawberries , for I do n't like you at all ! ''
`` You do n't , do n't you ? ''
cried Cecilia , provoked , and , catching the hat from Louisa , she flung the strawberries over the hedge .
`` Will nobody help me ? ''
exclaimed Louisa , snatching her hat again , and running away with all her force .
`` What have I done ? ''
said Cecilia , recollecting herself ; `` Louisa !
Louisa ! ''
she called very loud , but Louisa would not turn back ; she was running to her companions , who were still dancing , hand in hand , upon the grass , whilst Leonora , sitting in the middle , was singing to them .
`` Stop !
stop !
and hear me ! ''
cried Louisa , breaking through them ; and , rushing up to Leonora , she threw her hat at her feet , and panting for breath -- '' It was full -- almost full of my own strawberries , '' said she , `` the first I ever got out of my garden .
They should all have been for you , Leonora ; but now I have not one left .
They are all gone ! ''
said she ; and she hid her face in Leonora 's lap .
`` Gone !
gone where ? ''
said everyone , at once running up to her .
`` Cecilia !
Cecilia ! ''
said she , sobbing .
`` Cecilia , '' repeated Leonora , `` what of Cecilia ? ''
`` Yes , it was -- it was . ''
`` Come with me , '' said Leonora , unwilling to have her friend exposed .
`` Come , and I will get you some more strawberries . ''
`` Oh , I do n't mind the strawberries , indeed ; but I wanted to have had the pleasure of giving them to you . ''
Leonora took her up in her arms to carry her away , but it was too late .
`` What , Cecilia !
Cecilia , who won the prize !
It could not surely be Cecilia , '' whispered every busy tongue .
At this instant the bell summoned them in .
`` There she is !
There she is ! ''
cried they , pointing to an arbour , where Cecilia was standing ashamed and alone ; and , as they passed her , some lifted up their hands and eyes with astonishment , others whispered and huddled mysteriously together , as if to avoid her .
Leonora walked on , her head a little higher than usual .
`` Leonora ! ''
said Cecilia , timorously , as she passed .
`` Oh , Cecilia !
who would have thought that you had a bad heart ? ''
Cecilia turned her head aside and burst into tears .
`` Oh , no , indeed , she has not a bad heart ! ''
cried Louisa , running up to her and throwing her arms around her neck .
`` She 's very sorry ; are not you , Cecilia ?
But do n't cry any more , for I forgive you , with all my heart -- and I love you now , though I said I did not when I was in a passion . ''
`` Oh , you sweet-tempered girl !
how I love you ! ''
said Cecilia , kissing her .
`` Well , then , if you do , come along with me , and dry your eyes , for they are so red ! ''
`` Go , my dear , and I 'll come presently . ''
`` Then I will keep a place for you , next to me ; but you must make haste , or you will have to come in when we have all sat down to supper , and then you will be so stared at !
So do n't stay , now . ''
Cecilia followed Louisa with her eyes till she was out of sight .
`` And is Louisa , '' said she , to herself , `` the only one who would stop to pity me ?
Mrs .
Villars told me that this day should be mine .
She little thought how it would end ! ''
Saying these words , Cecilia threw herself down upon the ground ; her arm leaned upon a heap of turf which she had raised in the morning , and which , in the pride and gaiety of her heart , she had called her throne .
At this instant , Mrs .
Villars came out to enjoy the serenity of the evening , and , passing by the arbour where Cecilia lay , she started .
Cecilia rose hastily .
`` Who is there ? ''
said Mrs .
Villars .
`` It is I , madam . ''
`` And who is _I_ ? ''
`` Cecilia . ''
`` Why , what keeps you here , my dear ?
Where are your companions ?
This is , perhaps , one of the happiest days of your life . ''
`` Oh , no , madam , '' said Cecilia , hardly able to repress her tears .
`` Why , my dear , what is the matter ? ''
Cecilia hesitated .
`` Speak , my dear .
You know that when I ask you to tell me anything as your friend , I never punish you as your governess ; therefore you need not be afraid to tell me what is the matter . ''
`` No , madam , I am not afraid , but ashamed .
You asked me why I was not with my companions .
Why , madam , because they have all left me , and -- '' '' And what , my dear ? ''
`` And I see that they all dislike me ; and yet I do n't know why they should , for I take as much pains to please as any of them .
All my masters seem satisfied with me ; and you yourself , madam , were pleased this very morning to give me this bracelet ; and I am sure you would not have given it to anyone who did not deserve it . ''
`` Certainly not , '' said Mrs .
Villars .
`` You well deserve it for your application -- for your successful application .
The prize was for the most assiduous , not for the most amiable . ''
`` Then , if it had been for the most amiable , it would not have been for me ? ''
Mrs .
Villars , smiling , -- '' Why , what do you think yourself , Cecilia ?
You are better able to judge than I am .
I can determine whether or no you apply to what I give you to learn ; whether you attend to what I desire you to do , and avoid what I desire you not to do .
I know that I like you as a pupil , but I can not know that I should like you as a companion , unless I were your companion .
Therefore I must judge of what I should do , by seeing what others do in the same circumstances . ''
`` Oh , pray do n't , madam !
for then you would not love me either .
And yet I think you would love me ; for I hope that I am as ready to oblige , and as good-natured as -- '' '' Yes , Cecilia , I do n't doubt but that you would be very good natured to me ; but I 'm afraid that I should not like you unless you were good- tempered , too . ''
`` But , madam , by good-natured I mean good-tempered -- it 's all the same thing . ''
`` No , indeed , I understand by them two very different things .
You are good-natured , Cecilia ; for you are desirous to oblige and serve your companions -- to gain them praise , and save them from blame -- to give them pleasure , and relieve them from pain ; but Leonora is good-tempered , for she can bear with their foibles , and acknowledge her own .
Without disputing about the right , she sometimes yields to those who are in the wrong .
In short , her temper is perfectly good ; for it can bear and forbear . ''
`` I wish that mine could ! ''
said Cecilia , sighing .
`` It may , '' replied Mrs .
Villars ; `` but it is not wishes alone which can improve us in anything .
Turn the same exertion and perseverance which have won you the prize to-day to this object , and you will meet with the same success ; perhaps not on the first , the second , or the third attempt ; but depend upon it that you will at last .
Every new effort will weaken your bad habits , and strengthen your good ones .
But you must not expect to succeed all at once .
I repeat it to you , for habit must be counteracted by habit .
It would be as extravagant in us to expect that all our faults could be destroyed by one punishment , were it ever so severe , as it was in the Roman emperor we were reading of a few days ago , to wish that all the heads of his enemies were upon one neck , that he might cut them off at one blow . ''
Here Mrs .
Villars took Cecilia by the hand , and they began to walk home .
Such was the nature of Cecilia 's mind , that when any object was forcibly impressed on her imagination , it caused a temporary suspension of her reasoning faculties .
Hope was too strong a stimulus for her spirits ; and when fear did take possession of her mind , it was attended with total debility .
Her vanity was now as much mortified as in the morning it had been elated .
She walked on with Mrs .
Villars in silence , until they came under the shade of the elm-tree walk , and there , fixing her eyes upon Mrs .
Villars , she stopped short .
`` Do you think , madam , '' said she , with hesitation -- '' do you think , madam , that I have a bad heart ? ''
`` A bad heart , -- my dear !
why , what put that into your head ? ''
`` Leonora said that I had , madam , and I felt ashamed when she said so . ''
`` But , my dear , how can Leonora tell whether your heart be good or bad ?
However , in the first place , tell me what you mean by a bad heart . ''
`` Indeed I do not know what is meant by it , madam ; but it is something which everybody hates . ''
`` And why do they hate it ? ''
`` Because they think that it will hurt them , ma'am , I believe : and that those who have bad hearts take delight in doing mischief ; and that they never do anybody any good but for their own ends . ''
`` Then the best definition , '' said Mrs .
Villars , `` which you can give me of a bad heart is , that it is some constant propensity to hurt others , and to do wrong for the sake of doing wrong . ''
`` Yes , madam ; but that is not all either .
There is still something else meant ; something which I can not express -- which , indeed , I never distinctly understood ; but of which , therefore , I was the more afraid . ''
`` Well , then , to begin with what you do understand , tell me , Cecilia , do you really think it possible to be wicked merely for the love of wickedness ?
No human being becomes wicked all at once .
A man begins by doing wrong because it is , or because he thinks it , for his interest .
If he continue to do so , he must conquer his sense of shame and lose his love of virtue .
But how can you , Cecilia , who feel such a strong sense of shame , and such an eager desire to improve , imagine that you have a bad heart ? ''
`` Indeed , madam , I never did , until everybody told me so , and then I began to be frightened about it .
This very evening , madam , when I was in a passion , I threw little Louisa 's strawberries away , which , I am sure , I was very sorry for afterwards ; and Leonora and everybody cried out that I had a bad heart -- but I am sure I was only in a passion . ''
`` Very likely .
And when you are in a passion , as you call it , Cecilia , you see that you are tempted to do harm to others .
If they do not feel angry themselves , they do not sympathize with you .
They do not perceive the motive which actuates you ; and then they say that you have a bad heart .
I daresay , however , when your passion is over , and when you recollect yourself , you are very sorry for what you have done and said ; are not you ? ''
`` Yes , indeed , madam -- very sorry . ''
`` Then make that sorry of use to you , Cecilia , and fix it steadily in your thoughts , as you hope to be good and happy , that if you suffer yourself to yield to your passion upon every occasion , anger and its consequences will become familiar to your mind ; and , in the same proportion , your sense of shame will be weakened , till what you began with doing from sudden impulse you will end with doing from habit and choice : then you would , indeed , according to our definition , have a bad heart . ''
`` Oh , madam !
I hope -- I am sure I never shall . ''
`` No , indeed , Cecilia ; I do , indeed , believe that you never will ; on the contrary , I think that you have a very good disposition , and what is of infinitely more consequence to you , an active desire of improvement .
Show me that you have as much perseverance as you have candour , and I shall not despair of your becoming everything that I could wish . ''
Here Cecilia 's countenance brightened , and she ran up the steps in almost as high spirits as she ran down them in the morning .
`` Good-night to you , Cecilia , '' said Mrs .
Villars , as she was crossing the hall .
`` Good-night to you , madam , '' said Cecilia ; and she ran upstairs to bed .
She could not go to sleep ; but she lay awake , reflecting upon the events of the preceding day , and forming resolutions for the future , at the same time that she had resolved , and resolved without effect , she wished to give her mind some more powerful motive .
Ambition she knew to be its most powerful incentive .
`` Have I not , '' said she to herself , '' already won the prize of application , and can not the same application procure me a much higher prize ?
Mrs .
Villars said that if the prize had been promised to the most amiable , it would not have been given to me .
Perhaps it would not yesterday , perhaps it might not to-morrow ; but that is no reason that I should despair of ever deserving it . `` .
In consequence of this reasoning , Cecilia formed a design of proposing to her companions that they should give a prize , the first of the ensuing month ( the lst of June ) , to the most amiable .
Mrs .
Villars applauded the scheme , and her companions adopted it with the greatest alacrity .
`` Let the prize , '' said they , `` be a bracelet of our own hair ; '' and instantly their shining scissors were produced , and each contributed a lock of their hair .
They formed the most beautiful gradation of colours , from the palest auburn to the brightest black .
Who was to have the honour of plaiting them ?
was now the question .
Caroline begged that she might , as she could plait very neatly , she said .
Cecilia , however , was equally sure that she could do it much better ; and a dispute would have inevitably ensued , if Cecilia , recollecting herself just as her colour rose to scarlet , had not yielded -- yielded , with no very good grace indeed , but as well as could be expected for the first time .
For it is habit which confers ease ; and without ease , even in moral actions , there can be no grace .
The bracelet was plaited in the neatest manner by Caroline , finished round the edge with silver twist , and on it was worked , in the smallest silver letters , this motto , `` TO THE MOST AMIABLE . ''
The moment it was completed , everybody begged to try it on .
It fastened with little silver clasps , and as it was made large enough for the eldest girls , it was too large for the youngest .
Of this they bitterly complained , and unanimously entreated that it might be cut to fit them .
`` How foolish ! ''
exclaimed Cecilia ; `` do n't you perceive that if any of you win it , you have nothing to do but to put the clips a little further from the edge , but if we get it , we ca n't make it larger ? ''
`` Very true , '' said they ; `` but you need not to have called us foolish , Cecilia . ''
It was by such hasty and unguarded expressions as these that Cecilia offended .
A slight difference in the manner makes a very material one in the effect .
Cecilia lost more love by general petulance than she could gain by the greatest particular exertions .
How far she succeeded in curing herself of this defect -- how far she became deserving of the bracelet , and to whom the bracelet was given -- shall be told in the History of the First of June .
-- -- - The First of June was now arrived , and all the young competitors were in a state of the most anxious suspense .
Leonora and Cecilia continued to be the foremost candidates .
Their quarrel had never been finally adjusted , and their different pretensions now retarded all thoughts of a reconciliation .
Cecilia , though she was capable of acknowledging any of her faults in public before all her companions , could not humble herself in private to Leonora .
Leonora was her equal ; they were her inferiors , and submission is much easier to a vain mind , where it appears to be voluntary , than when it is the necessary tribute to justice or candour .
So strongly did Cecilia feel this truth , that she even delayed making any apology , or coming to any explanation with Leonora , until success should once more give her the palm .
`` If I win the bracelet , to-day , '' said she to herself , `` I will solicit the return of Leonora 's friendship ; it will be more valuable to me than even the bracelet , and at such a time , and asked in such a manner , she surely can not refuse it to me . ''
Animated with this hope of a double triumph , Cecilia canvassed with the most zealous activity .
By constant attention and exertion she had considerably abated the violence of her temper , and changed the course of her habits .
Her powers of pleasing were now excited , instead of her abilities to excel ; and , if her talents appeared less brilliant , her character was acknowledged to be more amiable .
So great an influence upon our manners and conduct have the objects of our ambition .
Cecilia was now , if possible , more than ever desirous of doing what was right , but she had not yet acquired sufficient fear of doing wrong .
This was the fundamental error of her mind ; it arose in a great measure from her early education .
Her mother died when she was very young ; and though her father had supplied her place in the best and kindest manner , he had insensibly infused into his daughter 's mind a portion of that enterprising , independent spirit which he justly deemed essential to the character of her brother .
This brother was some years older than Cecilia , but he had always been the favourite companion of her youth .
What her father 's precepts inculcated , his example enforced ; and even Cecilia 's virtues consequently became such as were more estimable in a man than desirable in a female .
All small objects and small errors she had been taught to disregard as trifles ; and her impatient disposition was perpetually leading her into more material faults ; yet her candour in confessing these , she had been suffered to believe , was sufficient reparation and atonement .
Leonora , on the contrary , who had been educated by her mother in a manner more suited to her sex , had a character and virtues more peculiar to a female .
Her judgment had been early cultivated , and her good sense employed in the regulation of her conduct .
She had been habituated to that restraint , which , as a woman , she was to expect in life , and early accustomed to yield .
Compliance in her seemed natural and graceful ; yet notwithstanding the gentleness of her temper , she was in reality more independent than Cecilia .
She had more reliance upon her own judgment , and more satisfaction in her own approbation .
The uniform kindness of her manner , the consistency and equality of her character , had fixed the esteem and passive love of her companions .
By passive love we mean that species of affection which makes us unwilling to offend rather than anxious to oblige , which is more a habit than an emotion of the mind .
For Cecilia her companions felt active love , for she was active in showing her love to them .
Active love arises spontaneously in the mind , after feeling particular instances of kindness , without reflection on the past conduct or general character .
It exceeds the merits of its object , and is connected with a feeling of generosity , rather than with a sense of justice .
Without determining which species of love is the most flattering to others , we can easily decide which is the most agreeable feeling to our minds .
We give our hearts more credit for being generous than for being just ; and we feel more self-complacency when we give our love voluntarily , than when we yield it as a tribute which we can not withhold .
Though Cecilia 's companions might not know all this in theory , they proved it in practice ; for they loved her in a much higher proportion to her merits than they loved Leonora .
Each of the young judges were to signify their choice by putting a red or a white shell into a vase prepared for the purpose .
Cecilia 's colour was red , Leonora 's white .
In the morning nothing was to be seen but these shells ; nothing talked of but the long expected event of the evening .
Cecilia , following Leonora's example , had made it a point of honour not to inquire of any individual her vote , previously to their final determination .
They were both sitting together in Louisa 's room .
Louisa was recovering from the measles .
Everyone during her illness had been desirous of attending her ; but Leonora and Cecilia were the only two that were permitted to see her , as they alone had had the distemper .
They were both assiduous in their care of Louisa , but Leonora 's want of exertion to overcome any disagreeable feelings of sensibility often deprived her of presence of mind , and prevented her from being so constantly useful as Cecilia .
Cecilia , on the contrary , often made too much noise and bustle with her officious assistance , and was too anxious to invent amusements and procure comforts for Louisa , without perceiving that illness takes away the power of enjoying them .
As she was sitting at the window in the morning , exerting herself to entertain Louisa , she heard the voice of an old peddler who often used to come to the house .
Downstairs they ran immediately , to ask Mrs .
Villars' permission to bring him into the hall .
Mrs .
Villars consented , and away Cecilia ran to proclaim the news to her companions .
Then , first returning into the hall , she found the peddler just unbuckling his box , and taking it off his shoulders .
`` What would you be pleased to want , miss ? ''
said the peddler ; `` I 've all kinds of tweezer-cases , rings , and lockets of all sorts , '' continued he , opening all the glittering drawers successively .
`` Oh ! ''
said Cecilia , shutting the drawer of lockets which tempted her most , `` these are not the things which I want .
Have you any china figures ?
any mandarins ? ''
`` Alack-a-day , miss , I had a great stock of that same chinaware ; but now I 'm quite out of them kind of things ; but I believe , '' said he , rummaging one of the deepest drawers , `` I believe I have one left , and here it is . ''
`` Oh , that is the very thing !
what 's its price ? ''
`` Only three shillings , ma'am . ''
Cecilia paid the money , and was just going to carry off the mandarin , when the peddler took out of his great- coat pocket a neat mahogany case .
It was about a foot long , and fastened at each end by two little clasps .
It had besides , a small lock in the middle .
`` What is that ? ''
said Cecilia , eagerly .
`` It 's only a china figure , miss , which I am going to carry to an elderly lady , who lives nigh hand , and who is mighty fond of such things . ''
`` Could you let me look at it ? ''
`` And welcome , miss , '' said he , and opened the case .
`` Oh , goodness !
how beautiful ! ''
exclaimed Cecilia .
It was a figure of Flora , crowned with roses , and carrying a basket of flowers in her hand .
Cecilia contemplated it with delight .
`` How I should like to give this to Louisa ! ''
said she to herself ; and , at last , breaking silence , `` Did you promise it to the old lady ? ''
`` Oh , no , miss , I did n't promise it -- she never saw it ; and if so be that you 'd like to take it , I 'd make no more words about it . ''
`` And how much does it cost ? ''
`` Why , miss , as to that , I 'll let you have it for half-a-guinea . ''
Cecilia immediately produced the box in which she kept her treasure , and , emptying it upon the table , she began to count the shillings .
Alas !
there were but six shillings .
`` How provoking ! ''
said she ; `` then I can't have it .
Where 's the mandarin ?
Oh , I have it , '' said she , taking it up , and looking at it with the utmost disgust .
`` Is this the same that I had before ? ''
`` Yes , miss , the very same , '' replied the peddler , who , during this time , had been examining the little box out of which Cecilia had taken her money -- it was of silver .
`` Why , ma'am , '' said he , `` since you 've taken such a fancy to the piece , if you 've a mind to make up the remainder of the money , I will take this here little box , if you care to part with it . ''
Now this box was a keepsake from Leonora to Cecilia .
`` No , '' said Cecilia hastily , blushing a little , and stretching out her hand to receive it .
`` Oh , miss ! ''
said he , returning it carelessly , `` I hope there 's no offence .
I meant but to serve you , that 's all .
Such a rare piece of china-work has no cause to go a-begging , '' added he .
Then , putting the Flora deliberately into the case , and turning the key with a jerk , he let it drop into his pocket ; when , lifting up his box by the leather straps , he was preparing to depart .
`` Oh , stay one minute ! ''
said Cecilia , in whose mind there had passed a very warm conflict during the peddler 's harangue .
`` Louisa would so like this Flora , '' said she , arguing with herself .
`` Besides , it would be so generous in me to give it to her instead of that ugly mandarin ; that would be doing only common justice , for I promised it to her , and she expects it .
Though , when I come to look at this mandarin , it is not even so good as hers was .
The gilding is all rubbed off , so that I absolutely must buy this for her .
Oh , yes !
I will , and she will be so delighted !
and then everybody will say it is the prettiest thing they ever saw , and the broken mandarin will be forgotten for ever . ''
Here Cecilia 's hand moved , and she was just going to decide : `` Oh , but stop , '' said she to herself , `` consider -- Leonora gave me this box , and it is a keepsake .
However , we have now quarrelled , and I dare say that she would not mind my parting with it .
I 'm sure that I should not care if she was to give away my keepsake , the smelling-bottle , or the ring which I gave her .
Then what does it signify ?
Besides , is it not my own ?
and have I not a right to do what I please with it ? ''
At this moment , so critical for Cecilia , a party of her companions opened the door .
She knew that they came as purchasers , and she dreaded her Flora 's becoming the prize of some higher bidder .
`` Here , '' said she , hastily putting the box into the peddler 's hand , without looking at it ; '' take it , and give me the Flora . ''
Her hand trembled , though she snatched it impatiently .
She ran by , without seeming to mind any of her companions .
Let those who are tempted to do wrong by the hopes of future gratification , or the prospect of certain concealment and impunity , remember that , unless they are totally depraved , they bear in their own hearts a monitor , who will prevent their enjoying what they ill obtained .
In vain Cecilia ran to the rest of her companions , to display her present , in hopes that the applause of others would restore her own self- complacency ; in vain she saw the Flora pass in due pomp from hand to hand , each vying with the other in extolling the beauty of the gift and the generosity of the giver .
Cecilia was still displeased with herself , with them , and even with their praise .
From Louisa 's gratitude , however , she yet expected much pleasure , and immediately she ran upstairs to her room .
In the meantime , Leonora had gone into the hall to buy a bodkin ; she had just broken hers .
In giving her change , the peddler took out of his pocket , with some halfpence , the very box which Cecilia had sold to him .
Leonora did not in the least suspect the truth , for her mind was above suspicion ; and besides , she had the utmost confidence in Cecilia .
`` I should like to have that box , '' said she , `` for it is like one of which I was very fond . ''
The peddler named the price , and Leonora took the box .
She intended to give it to little Louisa .
On going to her room she found her asleep , and she sat softly down by her bedside .
Louisa opened her eyes .
`` I hope I did n't disturb you , '' said Leonora .
`` Oh , no .
I did n't hear you come in ; but what have you got there ? ''
`` Only a little box ; would you like to have it ?
I bought on purpose for you , as I thought perhaps it would please you , because it 's like that which I gave Cecilia . ''
`` Oh , yes !
that out of which she used to give me Barbary drops .
I am very much obliged to you ; I always thought that exceedingly pretty , and this , indeed , is as like it as possible .
I ca n't unscrew it ; will you try ? ''
Leonora unscrewed it .
`` Goodness ! ''
exclaimed Louisa , `` this must be Cecilia 's box .
Look , do n't you see a great L at the bottom of it ? ''
Leonora 's colour changed .
`` Yes , '' she replied calmly , `` I see that ; but it is no proof that it is Cecilia 's .
You know that I bought this box just now of the peddler . ''
`` That may be , '' said Louisa ; `` but I remember scratching that L with my own needle , and Cecilia scolded me for it , too .
Do go and ask her if she has lost her box -- do , '' repeated Louisa , pulling her by the ruffle , as she did not seem to listen .
Leonora , indeed , did not hear , for she was lost in thought .
She was comparing circumstances , which had before escaped her attention .
She recollected that Cecilia had passed her as she came into the hall , without seeming to see her , but had blushed as she passed .
She remembered that the peddler appeared unwilling to part with the box , and was going to put it again in his pocket with the halfpence .
`` And why should he keep it in his pocket , and not show it with his other things ? ''
Combining all these circumstances , Leonora had no longer any doubt of the truth , for though she had honourable confidence in her friends , she had too much penetration to be implicitly credulous .
`` Louisa , '' she began , but at this instant she heard a step , which , by its quickness , she knew to be Cecilia 's , coming along the passage .
`` If you love me , Louisa , '' said Leonora , `` say nothing about the box . ''
`` Nay , but why not ?
I daresay she had lost it . ''
`` No , my dear , I 'm afraid she has not . ''
Louisa looked surprised .
`` But I have reasons for desiring you not to say anything about it . ''
`` Well , then , I wo n't , indeed . ''
Cecilia opened the door , came forward smiling , as if secure of a good reception , and taking the Flora out of the case , she placed it on the mantlepiece , opposite to Louisa 's bed .
`` Dear , how beautiful ! ''
cried Louisa , starting up .
`` Yes , '' said Cecilia , `` and guess who it 's for . ''
`` For me , perhaps ! ''
said the ingenuous Louisa .
`` Yes , take it , and keep it , for my sake .
You know that I broke your mandarin . ''
`` Oh , but this is a great deal prettier and larger than that . ''
`` Yes , I know it is ; and I meant that it should be so .
I should only have done what I was bound to do if I had only given you a mandarin . ''
`` Well , '' replied Louisa , `` and that would have been enough , surely ; but what a beautiful crown of roses !
and then that basket of flowers !
they almost look as if I could smell them .
Dear Cecilia , I 'm very much obliged to you ; but I wo n't take it by way of payment for the mandarin you broke ; for I 'm sure you could not help that , and , besides , I should have broken it myself by this time .
You shall give it to me entirely ; and as your keepsake , I 'll keep it as long as I live . ''
Louisa stopped short and coloured ; the word keepsake recalled the box to her mind , and all the train of ideas which the Flora had banished .
`` But , '' said she , looking up wistfully in Cecilia 's face , and holding the Flora doubtfully , `` did you -- '' Leonora , who was just quitting the room , turned her head back , and gave Louisa a look , which silenced her .
Cecilia was so infatuated with her vanity , that she neither perceived Leonora 's sign nor Louisa 's confusion , but continued showing off her present , by placing it in various situations , till at length she put it into the case , and laying it down with an affected carelessness upon the bed , `` I must go now , Louisa .
Good-bye , '' said she , running up and kissing her ; `` but I 'll come again presently , '' then , clapping the door after her she went .
But as soon as the formentation of her spirits subsided , the sense of shame , which had been scarcely felt when mixed with so many other sensations , rose uppermost in her mind .
`` What ! ''
said she to herself , `` is it possible that I have sold what I promised to keep for ever ?
and what Leonora gave me ?
and I have concealed it too , and have been making a parade of my generosity .
Oh !
what would Leonora , what would Louisa -- what would everybody think of me , if the truth were known ? ''
Humiliated and grieved by these reflections , Cecilia began to search in her own mind for some consoling idea .
She began to compare her conduct with that of others of her own age ; and at length , fixing her comparison upon her brother George , as the companion of whom , from her infancy , she had been habitually the most emulous , she recollected that an almost similar circumstance had once happened to him , and that he had not only escaped disgrace , but had acquired glory , by an intrepid confession of his fault .
Her father 's word to her brother , on the occasion , she also perfectly recollected .
`` Come to me , George , '' he said holding out his hand , `` you are a generous , brave boy : they who dare to confess their faults will make great and good men . ''
These were his words ; but Cecilia , in repeating them to herself , forgot to lay that emphasis on the word MEN , which would have placed it in contradistinction to the word WOMEN .
She willingly believed that the observation extended equally to both sexes , and flattered herself that she should exceed her brother in merit if she owned a fault , which she thought that it would be so much more difficult to confess .
`` Yes , but , '' said she , stopping herself , `` how can I confess it ?
This very evening , in a few hours , the prize will be decided .
Leonora or I shall win it .
I have now as good a chance as Leonora , perhaps a better ; and must I give up all my hopes -- all that I have been labouring for this month past ?
Oh , I never can !
If it were but to-morrow , or yesterday , or any day but this , I would not hesitate ; but now I am almost certain of the prize , and if I win it -- well , why then I will -- I think I will tell all -- yes I will ; I am determined , '' said Cecilia .
Here a bell summoned them to dinner .
Leonora sat opposite to her , and she was not a little surprised to see Cecilia look so gay and unconstrained .
`` Surely , '' said she to herself , `` if Cecilia had done that which I suspect , she would not , she could not , look as she does . ''
But Leonora little knew the cause of her gaiety .
Cecilia was never in higher spirits , or better pleased with herself , than when she had resolved upon a sacrifice or a confession .
`` Must not this evening be given to the most amiable ?
Whose , then , will it be ? ''
All eyes glanced first at Cecilia , and then at Leonora .
Cecilia smiled ; Leonora blushed .
`` I see that it is not yet decided , '' said Mrs .
Villars ; and immediately they ran upstairs , amidst confused whisperings .
Cecilia 's voice could be distinguished far above the rest .
`` How can she be so happy ! ''
said Leonora to herself .
`` Oh Cecilia , there was a time when you could not have neglected me so !
when we were always together the best of friends and companions ; our wishes , tastes , and pleasures the same !
Surely she did once love me , '' said Leonora ; `` but now she is quite changed .
She has even sold my keepsake ; and she would rather win a bracelet of hair from girls whom she did not always think so much superior to Leonora , than have my esteem , my confidence , and my friendship for her whole life -- yes , for her whole life , for I am sure she will be an amiable woman .
Oh , that this bracelet had never been thought of , or that I were certain of her winning it ; for I am sure that I do not wish to win it from her .
I would rather -- a thousand times rather -- that we were as we used to be than have all the glory in the world .
And how pleasing Cecilia can be when she wishes to please ! -- how candid she is ! -- how much she can improve herself !
Let me be just , though she has offended me ; she is wonderfully improved within this last month .
For one fault , and THAT against myself , shall I forget all her merits ? ''
As Leonora said these last words , she could but just hear the voices of her companions .
They had left her alone in the gallery .
She knocked softly at Louisa 's door .
`` Come in , '' said Louisa ; `` I 'm not asleep .
Oh , '' said she , starting up with the Flora in her hand , the instant that the door was opened ; `` I 'm so glad you are come , Leonora , for I did so long to hear what you all were making such a noise about .
Have you forgot that the bracelet -- '' '' Oh , yes !
is this the evening ? ''
inquired Leonora .
`` Well , here 's my white shell for you , '' said Louisa .
`` I 've kept it in my pocket this fortnight ; and though Cecilia did give me this Flora , I still love you a great deal better . ''
`` I thank you , Louisa , '' said Leonora , gratefully .
`` I will take your shell , and I shall value it as long as I live ; but here is a red one , and if you wish to show me that you love me , you will give this to Cecilia .
I know that she is particularly anxious for your preference , and I am sure that she deserves it . ''
`` Yes , if I could I would choose both of you , '' said Louisa , `` but you know I can only choose which I like the best . ''
`` If you mean , my dear Louisa , '' said Leonora , `` that you like me the best , I am very much obliged to you , for , indeed , I wish you to love me ; but it is enough for me to know it in private .
I should not feel the least more pleasure at hearing it in public , or in having it made known to all my companions , especially at a time when it would give poor Cecilia a great deal of pain . ''
`` But why should it give her pain ? ''
asked Louisa ; `` I do n't like her for being jealous of you . ''
`` Nay , Louisa , surely you do n't think Cecilia jealous ?
She only tries to excel , and to please ; she is more anxious to succeed than I am , it is true , because she has a great deal more activity , and perhaps more ambition .
And it would really mortify her to lose this prize -- you know that she proposed it herself .
It has been her object for this month past , and I am sure she has taken great pains to obtain it . ''
`` But , dear Leonora , why should you lose it ? ''
`` Indeed , my dear , it would be no loss to me ; and , if it were , I would willingly suffer it for Cecilia ; for , though we seem not to be such good friends as we used to be , I love her very much , and she will love me again -- I 'm sure she will ; when she no longer fears me as a rival , she will again love me as a friend . ''
Here Leonora heard a number of her companions running along the gallery .
They all knocked hastily at the door , calling `` Leonora !
Leonora !
will you never come ?
Cecilia has been with us this half-hour . ''
Leonora smiled .
`` Well , Louisa , '' said she , smiling , `` will you promise me ? ''
`` Oh , I am sure , by the way they speak to you , that they wo n't give you the prize ! ''
said the little Louisa , and the tears started into her eyes .
`` They love me , though , for all that , '' said Leonora ; `` and as for the prize , you know whom I wish to have it . ''
`` Leonora !
Leonora ! ''
called her impatient companions ; `` do n't you hear us ?
What are you about ? ''
`` Oh , she never will take any trouble about anything , '' said one of the party ; `` let 's go away . ''
`` Oh , go , go !
make haste ! ''
cried Louisa ; `` do n't stay ; they are so angry . ''
`` Remember , then , that you have promised me , '' said Leonora , and she left the room .
During all this time , Cecilia had been in the garden with her companions .
The ambition which she had felt to win the first prize -- the prize of superior talents and superior application -- was not to be compared to the absolute anxiety which she now expressed to win this simple testimony of the love and approbation of her equals and rivals .
To employ her exuberant activity , Cecilia had been dragging branches of lilacs and laburnums , roses and sweet briar , to ornament the bower in which her fate was to be decided .
It was excessively hot , but her mind was engaged , and she was indefatigable .
She stood still at last to admire her works .
Her companions all joined in loud applause .
They were not a little prejudiced in her favour by the great eagerness which she expressed to win their prize , and by the great importance which she seemed to affix to the preference of each individual .
At last , `` Where is Leonora ? ''
cried one of them ; and immediately , as we have seen , they ran to call her .
Cecilia was left alone .
Overcome with heat and too violent exertion , she had hardly strength to support herself ; each moment appeared to her intolerably long .
She was in a state of the utmost suspense , and all her courage failed her .
Even hope forsook her ; and hope is a cordial which leaves the mind depressed and enfeebled .
`` The time is now come , '' said Cecilia ; `` in a few moments all will be decided .
In a few moments -- goodness !
How much do I hazard ?
If I should not win the prize , how shall I confess what I have done ?
How shall I beg Leonora to forgive me ?
I , who hoped to restore my friendship to her as an honour !
They are gone to seek for her .
The moment she appears I shall be forgotten .
What -- what shall I do ? ''
said Cecilia , covering her face with her hands .
Such was Cecilia 's situation when Leonora , accompanied by her companions , opened the hall door .
They most of them ran forwards to Cecilia .
As Leonora came into the bower , she held out her hand to Cecilia .
`` We are not rivals , but friends , I hope , '' said she .
Cecilia clasped her hand ; but she was in too great agitation to speak .
The table was now set in the arbour -- the vase was now placed in the middle .
`` Well ! ''
said Cecilia , eagerly , `` who begins ? ''
Caroline , one of her friends , came forward first , and then all the others successively .
Cecilia 's emotion was hardly conceivable .
`` Now they are all in !
Count them , Caroline ! ''
`` One , two , three , four ; the numbers are both equal . ''
There was a dead silence .
`` No , they are not , '' exclaimed Cecilia , pressing forward , and putting a shell into a vase .
`` I have not given mine , and I give it to Leonora . ''
Then , snatching the bracelet , `` It is yours , Leonora , '' said she ; `` take it , and give me back your friendship . ''
The whole assembly gave one universal clap and a general shout of applause .
`` I can not be surprised at this from you , Cecilia , '' said Leonora ; `` and do you then still love me as you used to do ? ''
`` Oh , Leonora , stop !
do n't praise me ; I do n't deserve this , '' said she , turning to her loudly applauding companions .
`` You will soon despise me .
Oh , Leonora , you will never forgive me !
I have deceived you ; I have sold -- '' At this instant , Mrs .
Villars appeared .
The crowd divided .
She had heard all that passed , from her window .
`` I applaud your generosity , Cecilia , '' said she , `` but I am to tell you that , in this instance it is unsuccessful .
You have not it in your power to give the prize to Leonora .
It is yours .
I have another vote to give to you .
You have forgotten Louisa . ''
`` Louisa ! ''
exclaimed Cecilia ; `` but surely , ma'am , Louisa loves Leonora better than she does me . ''
`` She commissioned me , however , '' said Mrs .
Villars , `` to give you a red shell ; and you will find it in this box . ''
Cecilia started , and turned as pale as death ; it was the fatal box !
Mrs .
Villars produced another box .
She opened it ; it contained the Flora .
`` And Louisa also desired me , '' said she , `` to return to you this Flora . ''
She put it into Cecilia 's hand .
Cecilia trembled so that she could not hold it .
Leonora caught it .
`` Oh , madam !
Oh , Leonora ! ''
exclaimed Cecilia ; `` now I have no hope left .
I intended -- I was just going to tell -- '' '' Dear Cecilia , '' said Leonora , `` you need not tell it me ; I know it already ; and I forgive you with all my heart . ''
`` Yes , I can prove to you , '' said Mrs .
Villars , `` that Leonora has forgiven you .
It is she who has given you the prize ; it was she who persuaded Louisa to give you her vote .
I went to see her a little while ago ; and perceiving , by her countenance , that something was the matter , I pressed her to tell me what it was .
`` 'Why , madam , ' said she , 'Leonora has made me promise to give my shell to Cecilia .
Now I do n't love Cecilia half so well as I do Leonora .
Besides , I would not have Cecilia think I vote for her because she gave me a Flora . '
Whilst Louisa was speaking , '' continued Mrs .
Villars , `` I saw this silver box lying on the bed .
I took it up , and asked if it was not yours , and how she came by it .
'Indeed , madam , ' said Louisa , ' I could have been almost certain that it was Cecilia 's ; but Leonora gave it me , and she said that she bought it of the peddler this morning .
If anybody else had told me so , I could not have believed them , because I remember the box so well ; but I ca n't help believing Leonora . '
But did not you ask Cecilia about it ?
said I .
'No , madam , ' replied Louisa ; 'for Leonora forbade me .
I guessed her reason . '
Well , said I , give me the box , and I will carry your shell in it to Cecilia .
'Then , madam , ' said she , 'if I must give it her , pray do take the Flora , and return it to her first , that she may not think it is for that I do it . ' ''
`` Oh , generous Louisa ! ''
exclaimed Cecilia ; `` but , indeed , Leonora , I can not take your shell . ''
`` Then , dear Cecilia , accept of mine instead of it !
you can not refuse it ; I only follow your example .
As for the bracelet , '' added Leonora , taking Cecilia 's hand , `` I assure you I do n't wish for it , and you do , and you deserve it . ''
`` No , '' said Cecilia , `` indeed , I do not deserve it .
Next to you , surely Louisa deserves it best . ''
`` Louisa !
oh , yes , Louisa , '' exclaimed everybody with one voice .
`` Yes , '' said Mrs .
Villars , `` and let Cecilia carry the bracelet to her ; she deserves that reward .
For one fault I can not forget all your merits , Cecilia , nor , I am sure , will your companions . ''
`` Then , surely , not your best friend , '' said Leonora , kissing her .
Everybody present was moved .
They looked up to Leonora with respectful and affectionate admiration .
`` Oh , Leonora , how I love you !
and how I wish to be like you ! ''
exclaimed Cecilia -- '' to be as good , as generous ! ''
`` Rather wish , Cecilia , '' interrupted Mrs .
Villars , `` to be as just ; to be as strictly honourable , and as invariably consistent .
Remember , that many of our sex are capable of great efforts -- of making what they call great sacrifices to virtue or to friendship ; but few treat their friends with habitual gentleness , or uniformly conduct themselves with prudence and good sense . ''
THE LITTLE MERCHANTS .
CHAPTER I. Chi di gallina nasce , convien che rozole .
As the old cock crows , so crows the young .
Those who have visited Italy give us an agreeable picture of the cheerful industry of the children of all ages in the celebrated city of Naples .
Their manner of living and their numerous employments are exactly described in the following `` Extract from a Traveller 's Journal . ''
* * Varieties of Literature , vol .
i. p .
299 .
`` The children are busied in various ways .
A great number of them bring fish for sale to town from Santa Lucia ; others are very often seen about the arsenals , or wherever carpenters are at work , employed in gathering up the chips and pieces of wood ; or by the sea-side , picking up sticks , and whatever else has drifted ashore , which , when their basket is full , they carry away .
`` Children of two or three years old , who can scarcely crawl along upon the ground , in company with boys of five or six , are employed in this pretty trade .
Hence they proceed with their baskets into the heart of the city , where in several places they form a sort of little market , sitting round with their stock of wood before them .
Labourers , and the lower order of citizens , buy it of them to burn in the tripods for warming themselves , or to use in their scanty kitchens .
`` Other children carry about for sale the water of the sulphurous wells , which , particularly in the spring season , is drunk in great abundance .
Others again endeavour to turn a few pence by buying a small matter of fruit , of pressed honey , cakes , and comfits , and then , like little peddlers , offer and sell them to other children , always for no more profit than that they may have their share of them free of expense .
`` It is really curious to see how an urchin , whose whole stock and property consist in a board and a knife , will carry about a water-melon , or a half roasted gourd , collect a troup of children round him , set down his board , and proceed to divide the fruit into small pieces among them .
`` The buyers keep a sharp look out to see that they have enough for their little piece of copper ; and the Lilliputian tradesmen act with no less caution as the exigencies of the case may require , to prevent his being cheated out of a morsel . ''
The advantages of truth and honesty , and the value of a character for integrity , are very early felt amongst these little merchants in their daily intercourse with each other .
The fair dealer is always sooner or later seen to prosper .
The most cunning cheat is at last detected and disgraced .
Numerous instances of the truth of this common observation were remarked by many Neapolitan children , especially by those who were acquainted with the characters and history of Piedro and Francisco , two boys originally equal in birth , fortune and capacity , but different in their education , and consequently in their habits and conduct .
Francisco was the son of an honest gardener , who , from the time he could speak , taught him to love to speak the truth , showed him that liars are never believed -- that cheats and thieves can not be trusted , and that the shortest way to obtain a good character is to deserve it .
Youth and white paper , as the proverb says , take all impressions .
The boy profited much by his father 's precepts , and more by his example ; he always heard his father speak the truth , and saw that he dealt fairly with everybody .
In all his childish traffic , Francisco , imitating his parents , was scrupulously honest , and therefore all his companions trusted him -- '' As honest as Francisco , '' became a sort of proverb amongst them .
`` As honest as Francisco , '' repeated Piedro 's father , when he one day heard this saying .
`` Let them say so ; I say , 'As sharp as Piedro ' ; and let us see which will go through the world best . ''
With the idea of making his son SHARP he made him cunning .
He taught him , that to make a GOOD BARGAIN was to deceive as to the value and price of whatever he wanted to dispose of ; to get as much money as possible from customers by taking advantage of their ignorance or of their confidence .
He often repeated his favourite proverb -- '' The buyer has need of a hundred eyes ; the seller has need but of one . ''
* And he took frequent opportunities of explaining the meaning of this maxim to his son .
He was a fisherman ; and as his gains depended more upon fortune than upon prudence , he trusted habitually to his good luck .
After being idle for a whole day , he would cast his line or his nets , and if he was lucky enough to catch a fine fish , he would go and show it in triumph to his neighbour the gardener .
* Chi compra ha bisogna di cent ' occhi ; chi vende n'ha assai di uno .
`` You are obliged to work all day long for your daily bread , '' he would say .
`` Look here ; I work but five minutes , and I have not only daily bread , but daily fish . ''
Upon these occasions , our fisherman always forgot , or neglected to count , the hours and days which were wasted in waiting for a fair wind to put to sea , or angling in vain on the shore .
Little Piedro , who used to bask in the sun upon the sea-shore beside his father , and to lounge or sleep away his time in a fishing-boat , acquired habits of idleness , which seemed to his father of little consequence whilst he was BUT A CHILD .
`` What will you do with Piedro as he grows up , neighbour ? ''
said the gardener .
`` He is smart and quick enough , but he is always in mischief .
Scarcely a day has passed for this fortnight but I have caught him amongst my grapes .
I track his footsteps all over my vineyard . ''
`` HE IS BUT A CHILD yet , and knows no better , '' replied the fisherman .
`` But if you do n't teach him better now he is a child , how will he know when he is a man ? ''
said the gardener .
`` A mighty noise about a bunch of grapes , truly ! ''
cried the fisherman : `` a few grapes more or less in your vineyard , what does it signify ? ''
`` I speak for your son 's sake , and not for the sake of my grapes , '' said the gardener ; `` and I tell you again , the boy will not do well in the world , neighbour , if you do n't look after him in time . ''
`` He 'll do well enough in the world , you will find , '' answered the fisherman , carelessly .
`` Whenever he casts my nets , they never come up empty .
'It is better to be lucky than wise . ' ''
* * E meglio esser fortunato che savio .
This was a proverb which Piedro had frequently heard from his father , and to which he most willingly trusted , because it gave him less trouble to fancy himself fortunate than to make himself wise .
`` Come here , child , '' said his father to him , when he returned home after the preceding conversation with the gardener ; `` how old are you , my boy ? -- twelve years old , is not it ? ''
`` As old as Francisco , and older by six months , '' said Piedro .
`` And smarter and more knowing by six years , '' said his father .
`` Here , take these fish to Naples , and let us see how you 'll sell them for me .
Venture a small fish , as the proverb says , to catch a great one .
* I was too late with them at the market yesterday , but nobody will know but what they are just fresh out of the water , unless you go and tell them . ''
* Butta una sardella per pigliar un luccio .
`` Not I ; trust me for that ; I 'm not such a fool , '' replied Piedro , laughing ; `` I leave that to Francisco .
Do you know , I saw him the other day miss selling a melon for his father by turning the bruised side to the customer , who was just laying down the money for it , and who was a raw servant-boy , moreover -- one who would never have guessed there were two sides to a melon , if he had not , as you say , father , been told of it ? ''
`` Off with you to market .
You are a droll chap , '' said his father , `` and will sell my fish cleverly , I 'll be bound .
As to the rest , let every man take care of his own grapes .
You understand me , Piedro ? ''
`` Perfectly , '' said the boy , who perceived that his father was indifferent as to his honesty , provided he sold fish at the highest price possible .
He proceeded to the market , and he offered his fish with assiduity to every person whom he thought likely to buy it , especially to those upon whom he thought he could impose .
He positively asserted to all who looked at his fish , that they were just fresh out of the water .
Good judges of men and fish knew that he said what was false , and passed him by with neglect ; but it was at last what he called GOOD LUCK to meet with the very same young raw servant-boy who would have bought the bruised melon from Francisco .
He made up to him directly , crying , `` Fish !
Fine fresh fish !
fresh fish ! ''
`` Was it caught to-day ? ''
said the boy .
`` Yes , this morning ; not an hour ago , '' said Piedro , with the greatest effrontery .
The servant-boy was imposed upon ; and being a foreigner , speaking the Italian language but imperfectly , and not being expert at reckoning the Italian money , he was no match for the cunning Piedro , who cheated him not only as to the freshness , but as to the price of the commodity .
Piedro received nearly half as much again for his fish as he ought to have done .
On his road homewards from Naples to the little village of Resina , where his father lived , he overtook Francisco , who was leading his father's ass .
The ass was laden with large panniers , which were filled with the stalks and leaves of cauliflowers , cabbages , broccoli , lettuces , etc. -- all the refuse of the Neapolitan kitchens , which are usually collected by the gardeners ' boys , and carried to the gardens round Naples , to be mixed with other manure .
`` Well filled panniers , truly , '' said Piedro , as he overtook Francisco and the ass .
The panniers were indeed not only filled to the top , but piled up with much skill and care , so that the load met over the animal 's back .
`` It is not a very heavy load for the ass , though it looks so large , '' said Francisco .
`` The poor fellow , however , shall have a little of this water , '' added he , leading the ass to a pool by the roadside .
`` I was not thinking of the ass , boy ; I was not thinking of any ass , but of you , when I said , 'Well filled panniers , truly ! '
This is your morning 's work , I presume , and you 'll make another journey to Naples to- day , on the same errand , I warrant , before your father thinks you have done enough ? ''
`` Not before MY FATHER thinks I have done enough , but before I think so myself , '' replied Francisco .
`` I do enough to satisfy myself and my father , too , '' said Piedro , `` without slaving myself after your fashion .
Look here , '' producing the money he had received for the fish ; `` all this was had for asking .
It is no bad thing , you 'll allow , to know how to ask for money properly . ''
`` I should be ashamed to beg , or borrow either , '' said Francisco .
`` Neither did I get what you see by begging , or borrowing either , '' said Piedro , `` but by using my wits ; not as you did yesterday , when , like a novice , you showed the bruised side of your melon , and so spoiled your market by your wisdom . ''
`` Wisdom I think it still , '' said Francisco .
`` And your father ? ''
asked Piedro .
`` And my father , '' said Francisco .
`` Mine is of a different way of thinking , '' said Piedro .
`` He always tells me that the buyer has need of a hundred eyes , and if one can blind the whole hundred , so much the better .
You must know , I got off the fish to- day that my father could not sell yesterday in the market -- got it off for fresh just out of the river -- got twice as much as the market price for it ; and from whom , think you ?
Why , from the very booby that would have bought the bruised melon for a sound one if you would have let him .
You 'll allow I 'm no fool , Francisco , and that I 'm in a fair way to grow rich , if I go on as I have begun . ''
`` Stay , '' said Francisco ; `` you forgot that the booby you took in to-day will not be so easily taken in to-morrow .
He will buy no more fish from you , because he will be afraid of your cheating him ; but he will be ready enough to buy fruit from me , because he will know I shall not cheat him -- so you 'll have lost a customer , and I gained one . ''
`` With all my heart , '' said Piedro .
`` One customer does not make a market ; if he buys no more from me , what care I ?
there are people enough to buy fish in Naples . ''
`` And do you mean to serve them all in the same manner ? ''
asked Francisco .
`` If they will be only so good as to give me leave , '' said Piedro , laughing , and repeating his father 's proverb , `` 'Venture a small fish to catch a large one . ' ''
* He had learned to think that to cheat in making bargains was witty and clever .
* see anted .
`` And you have never considered , then , '' said Francisco , `` that all these people will , one after another , find you out in time ? ''
`` Ay , in time ; but it will be some time first .
There are a great many of them , enough to last me all the summer , if I lose a customer a day , '' said Piedro .
`` And next summer , '' observed Francisco , `` what will you do ? ''
`` Next summer is not come yet ; there is time enough to think what I shall do before next summer comes .
Why , now , suppose the blockheads , after they had been taken in and found it out , all joined against me , and would buy none of our fish -- what then ?
Are there no trades but that of a fisherman ?
In Naples , are there not a hundred ways of making money for a smart lad like me ?
as my father says .
What do you think of turning merchant , and selling sugar-plums and cakes to the children in their market ?
Would they be hard to deal with , think you ? ''
`` I think not , '' said Francisco ; `` but I think the children would find out in time if they were cheated , and would like it as little as the men . ''
`` I do n't doubt them .
Then IN TIME I could , you know , change my trade -- sell chips and sticks in the wood-market -- hand about the lemonade to the fine folks , or twenty other things .
There are trades enough , boy . ''
`` Yes , for the honest dealer , '' said Francisco , `` but for no other ; for in all of them you 'll find , as MY father says , that a good character is the best fortune to set up with .
Change your trade ever so often , you 'll be found out for what you are at last . ''
`` And what am I , pray ? ''
said Piedro , angrily .
`` The whole truth of the matter is , Francisco , that you envy my good luck , and ca n't bear to hear this money jingle in my hand .
Ay , stroke the long ears of your ass , and look as wise as you please .
It 's better to be lucky than wise , as MY father says .
Good morning to you .
When I am found out for what I am , or when the worst comes to the worst , I can drive a stupid ass , with his panniers filled with rubbish , as well as you do now , HONEST FRANCISCO . ''
`` Not quite so well .
Unless you were HONEST FRANCISCO , you would not fill his panniers quite so readily . `` .
This was certain , that Francisco was so well known for his honesty amongst all the people at Naples with whom his father was acquainted , that everyone was glad to deal with him ; and as he never wronged anyone , all were willing to serve him -- at least , as much as they could without loss to themselves : so that after the market was over , his panniers were regularly filled by the gardeners and others with whatever he wanted .
His industry was constant , his gains small but certain , and he every day had more and more reason to trust to his father 's maxim -- That honesty is the best policy .
The foreign servant lad , to whom Francisco had so honestly , or , as Piedro said , so sillily , shown the bruised side of the melon , was an Englishman .
He left his native country , of which he was extremely fond , to attend upon his master , to whom he was still more attached .
His master was in a declining state of health , and this young lad waited on him a little more to his mind than his other servants .
We must , in consideration of his zeal , fidelity and inexperience , pardon him for not being a good judge of fish .
Though he had simplicity enough to be easily cheated once , he had too much sense to be twice made a dupe .
The next time he met Piedro in the market , he happened to be in company with several English gentlemen's servants , and he pointed Piedro out to them all as an arrant knave .
They heard his cry of `` Fresh fish !
fresh fish !
fine fresh fish ! ''
with incredulous smiles , and let him pass , but not without some expressions of contempt , though uttered in English , he tolerably well understood ; for the tone of contempt is sufficiently expressive in all languages .
He lost more by not selling his fish to these people than he had gained the day before by cheating the ENGLISH BOOBY .
The market was well supplied , and he could not get rid of his cargo .
`` Is not this truly provoking ? ''
said Piedro , as he passed by Francisco , who was selling fruit for his father .
`` Look , my basket is as heavy as when I left home and look at 'em yourself , they really are fine fresh fish to-day and yet , because that revengeful booby told how I took him in yesterday , not one of yonder crowd would buy them ; and all the time they really are fresh to-day ! ''
`` So they are , '' said Franscisco , `` but you said so yesterday , when they were not ; and he that was duped then , is not ready to believe you to-day .
How does he know that you deserve it better ? ''
`` He might have looked at the fish , '' repeated Piedro ; `` they are fresh to- day .
I am sure he need not have been afraid . ''
`` Ay , '' said Francisco ; `` but as my father said to you once -- the scalded dog fears cold water . ''
* * Il cane scottato dell ' acqua calda ha paura poi della fredda .
Here their conversation was interrupted by the same English lad , who smiled as he came up to Francisco , and taking up a fine pine-apple , he said , in a mixture of bad Italian and English -- '' I need not look at the other side of this ; you will tell me if it is not as good as it looks .
Name your price ; I know you have but one , and that an honest one ; and as to the rest , I am able and willing to pay for what I buy ; that is to say , my master is , which comes to the same thing .
I wish your fruit could make him well , and it would be worth its weight in gold to me , at least .
We must have some of your grapes for him . ''
`` Is he not well ? ''
inquired Francisco .
`` We must , then , pick out the best for him , '' at the same time singling out a tempting bunch .
`` I hope he will like these ; but if you could some day come as far as Resina ( it is a village but a few miles out of town , where we have our vineyard ) , you could there choose for yourself , and pluck them fresh from the vines for your poor master . ''
`` Bless you , my good boy ; I should take you for an Englishman , by your way of dealing .
I 'll come to your village .
Only write me down the name ; for your Italian names slip through my head .
I 'll come to the vineyard if it was ten miles off ; and all the time we stay in Naples ( may it not be so long as I fear it will !
) , with my master 's leave , which he never refuses me to anything that 's proper , I 'll deal with you for all our fruit , as sure as my name 's Arthur , and with none else , with my good will .
I wish all your countrymen would take after you in honesty , indeed I do , '' concluded the Englishman , looking full at Piedro , who took up his unsold basket of fish , looking somewhat silly , and gloomily walked off .
Arthur , the English servant , was as good as his word .
He dealt constantly with Francisco , and proved an excellent customer , buying from him during the whole season as much fruit as his master wanted .
His master , who was an Englishman of distinction , was invited to take up his residence , during his stay in Italy , at the Count de F .
's villa , which was in the environs of Naples -- an easy walk from Resina .
Francisco had the pleasure of seeing his father 's vineyard often full of generous visitors , and Arthur , who had circulated the anecdote of the bruised melon , was , he said , `` proud to think that some of this was his doing , and that an Englishman never forgot a good turn , be it from a countryman or foreigner . ''
`` My dear boy , '' said Francisco 's father to him , whilst Arthur was in the vineyard helping to tend the vines , `` I am to thank you and your honesty , it seems , for our having our hands so full of business this season .
It is fair you should have a share of our profits . ''
`` So I have , father , enough and enough , when I see you and mother going on so well .
What can I want more ? ''
`` Oh , my brave boy , we know you are a grateful , good son ; but I have been your age myself ; you have companions , you have little expenses of your own .
Here ; this vine , this fig-tree , and a melon a week next summer shall be yours .
With these make a fine figure amongst the little Neapolitan merchants ; and all I wish is that you may prosper as well , and by the same honest means , in managing for yourself , as you have done managing for me . ''
`` Thank you , father ; and if I prosper at all , it shall be by those means , and no other , or I should not be worthy to be called your son . ''
Piedro the cunning did not make quite so successful a summer 's work as did Francisco the honest .
No extraordinary events happened , no singular instance of bad or good luck occurred ; but he felt , as persons usually do , the natural consequences of his own actions .
He pursued his scheme of imposing , as far as he could , upon every person he dealt with ; and the consequence was , that at last nobody would deal with him .
`` It is easy to outwit one person , but impossible to outwit all the world , '' said a man * who knew the world at least as well as either Piedro or his father .
* The Duke de Rochefoucault. -- '' On peut etre puls fin qu'un autre , mais pas plus fin que tous les autres . ''
Piedro 's father , amongst others , had reason to complain .
He saw his own customers fall off from him , and was told , whenever he went into the market , that his son was such a cheat there was no dealing with him .
One day , when he was returning from the market in a very bad humour , in consequence of these reproaches , and of his not having found customers for his goods , he espied his SMART son Piedro at a little merchant's fruit-board devouring a fine gourd with prodigious greediness .
`` Where , glutton , do you find money to pay for these dainties ? ''
exclaimed his father , coming close up to him , with angry gestures .
Piedro 's mouth was much too full to make an immediate reply , nor did his father wait for any , but darting his hand into the youth 's pocket , pulled forth a handful of silver .
`` The money , father , '' said Piedro , `` that I got for the fish yesterday , and that I meant to give you to-day , before you went out . ''
`` Then I 'll make you remember it against another time , sirrah ! ''
said his father .
`` I 'll teach you to fill your stomach with my money .
Am I to lose my customers by your tricks , and then find you here eating my all ?
You are a rogue , and everybody has found you out to be a rogue ; and the worst of rogues I find you , who scruples not to cheat his own father . ''
Saying these words , with great vehemence he seized hold of Piedro , and in the very midst of the little fruit-market gave him a severe beating .
This beating did the boy no good ; it was vengeance not punishment .
Piedro saw that his father was in a passion , and knew that he was beaten because he was found out to be a rogue , rather than for being one .
He recollected perfectly that his father once said to him : `` Let everyone take care of his own grapes . ''
Indeed it was scarcely reasonable to expect that a boy who had been educated to think that he might cheat every customer he could in the way of trade , should be afterwards scrupulously honest in his conduct towards the father whose proverbs encouraged his childhood in cunning .
Piedro writhed with bodily pain as he left the market after his drubbing , but his mind was not in the least amended .
On the contrary , he was hardened to the sense of shame by the loss of reputation .
All the little merchants were spectators of this scene , and heard his father 's words : '' You ARE a rogue , and the worst of rogues , who scruples not to cheat his own father . ''
These words were long remembered , and long did Piedro feel their effects .
He once flattered himself that , when his trade of selling fish failed him , he could readily engage in some other ; but he now found , to his mortification , that what Francisco 's father said proved true : `` In all trades the best fortune to set up with is a good character . ''
Not one of the little Neapolitan merchants would either enter into partnership with him , give him credit , or even trade with him for ready money .
`` If you would cheat your own father , to be sure you will cheat us , '' was continually said to him by these prudent little people .
Piedro was taunted and treated with contempt at home and abroad .
His father , when he found that his son 's smartness was no longer useful in making bargains , shoved him out of his way whenever he met him .
All the food or clothes that he had at home seemed to be given to him grudgingly , and with such expressions as these : `` Take that ; but it is too good for you .
You must eat this , now , instead of gourds and figs -- and be thankful you have even this . ''
Piedro spent a whole winter very unhappily .
He expected that all his old tricks , and especially what his father had said of him in the market- place , would be soon forgotten ; but month passed after month , and still these things were fresh in the memory of all who had known them .
It is not easy to get rid of a bad character .
A very great rogue * was once heard to say , that he would , with all his heart , give ten thousand pounds for a good character , because he knew that he could make twenty thousand by it .
* Chartres .
Something like this was the sentiment of our cunning hero when he experienced the evils of a bad reputation , and when he saw the numerous advantages which Francisco 's good character procured .
Such had been Piedro 's wretched education , that even the hard lessons of experience could not alter its pernicious effects .
He was sorry his knavery had been detected , but he still thought it clever to cheat , and was secretly persuaded that , if he had cheated successfully , he should have been happy .
`` But I know I am not happy now , '' said he to himself one morning , as he sat alone disconsolate by the sea-shore , dressed in tattered garments , weak and hungry , with an empty basket beside him .
His fishing- rod , which he held between his knees , bent over the dry sands instead of into the water , for he was not thinking of what he was about ; his arms were folded , his head hung down , and his ragged hat was slouched over his face .
He was a melancholy spectacle .
Francisco , as he was coming from his father 's vineyard with a large dish of purple and white grapes upon his head , and a basket of melons and figs hanging upon his arm , chanced to see Piedro seated in this melancholy posture .
Touched with compassion , Francisco approached him softly ; his footsteps were not heard upon the sands , and Piedro did not perceive that anyone was near him till he felt something cold touch his hand ; he then started , and , looking up , saw a bunch of grapes , which Francisco was holding over his head .
`` Eat them : you 'll find them very good , I hope , '' said Francisco , with a benevolent smile .
`` They are excellent -- most excellent , and I am much obliged to you , Francisco , '' said Piedro .
`` I was very hungry , and that 's what I am now , without anybody 's caring anything about it .
I am not the favourite I was with my father , but I know it is all my own fault . ''
`` Well , but cheer up , '' said Francisco ; `` my father always says , 'One who knows he has been in fault , and acknowledges it , will scarcely be in fault again . '
Yes , take as many figs as you will , '' continued he ; and held his basket closer to Piedro , who , as he saw , cast a hungry eye upon one of the ripe figs .
`` But , '' said Piedro , after he had taken several , `` shall not I get you into a scrape by taking so many ?
Wo n't your father be apt to miss them ? ''
`` Do you think I would give them to you if they were not my own ? ''
said Francisco , with a sudden glance of indignation .
`` Well , do n't be angry that I asked the question ; it was only from fear of getting you into disgrace that I asked it . ''
`` It would not be easy for anybody to do that , I hope , '' said Francisco , rather proudly .
`` And to me less than anybody , '' replied Piedro , in an insinuating tone , '' _I , _ that am so much obliged to you ! ''
`` A bunch of grapes , and a few figs , are no mighty obligation , '' said Francisco , smiling ; `` I wish I could do more for you .
You seem , indeed , to have been very unhappy of late .
We never see you in the markets as we used to do . ''
`` No ; ever since my father beat me , and called me rogue before all the children there , I have never been able to show my face without being gibed at by one or t'other .
If you would but take me along with you amongst them , and only just SEEM my friend , for a day or two , or so , it would quite set me up again ; for they all like you . ''
`` I would rather BE than seem your friend , if I could , '' said Francisco .
`` Ay , to be sure ; that would be still better , '' said Piedro , observing that Francisco , as he uttered his last sentence , was separating the grapes and other fruits into two equal divisions .
`` To be sure I would rather you would BE than SEEM a friend to me ; but I thought that was too much to ask at first , though I have a notion , notwithstanding I have been so UNLUCKY lately -- I have a notion you would have no reason to repent of it .
You would find me no bad hand , if you were to try , and take me into partnership . ''
`` Partnership ! ''
interrupted Francisco , drawing back alarmed ; `` I had no thoughts of that . ''
`` But wo n't you ?
ca n't you ? ''
said Piedro , in a supplicating tone ; `` CAN'T you have thoughts of it ?
You 'd find me a very active partner . ''
Franscisco still drew back , and kept his eyes fixed upon the ground .
He was embarrassed ; for he pitied Piedro , and he scarcely knew how to point out to him that something more is necessary in a partner in trade besides activity , and that is honesty .
`` Ca n't you ? ''
repeated Piedro , thinking that he hesitated from merely mercenary motives .
`` You shall have what share of the profits you please . ''
`` I was not thinking of the profits , '' said Francisco ; `` but without meaning to be ill-natured to you , Piedro , I must say that I can not enter into any partnership with you at present ; but I will do what , perhaps , you will like as well , '' said he , taking half the fruit out of his basket ; '' you are heartily welcome to this ; try and sell it in the children's fruit market .
I 'll go on before you , and speak to those I am acquainted with , and tell them you are going to set up a new character , and that you hope to make it a good one . ''
`` Hey , shall I !
Thank you for ever , dear Francisco , '' cried Piedro , seizing his plentiful gift of fruit .
`` Say what you please for me . ''
`` But do n't make me say anything that is not true , '' said Francisco , pausing .
`` No , to be sure not , '' said Piedro ; `` I DO mean to give no room for scandal .
If I could get them to trust me as they do you , I should be happy indeed . ''
`` That is what you may do , if you please , '' said Francisco .
`` Adieu , I wish you well with all my heart ; but I must leave you now , or I shall be too late for the market . ''
CHAPTER II .
Chi va piano va sano , e anche lontano .
Fair and softly goes far in a day .
Piedro had now an opportunity of establishing a good character .
When he went into the market with his grapes and figs , he found that he was not shunned or taunted as usual .
All seemed disposed to believe in his intended reformation , and to give him a fair trial .
These favourable dispositions towards him were the consequence of Francisco 's benevolent representations .
He told them that he thought Piedro had suffered enough to cure him of his tricks , and that it would be cruelty in them , because he might once have been in fault , to banish him by their reproaches from amongst them , and thus to prevent him from the means of gaining his livelihood honestly .
Piedro made a good beginning , and gave what several of the younger customers thought excellent bargains .
His grapes and figs were quickly sold , and with the money that he got for them he the next day purchased from a fruit dealer a fresh supply ; and thus he went on for some time , conducting himself with scrupulous honesty , so that he acquired some credit among his companions .
They no longer watched him with suspicious eyes .
They trusted to his measures and weights , and they counted less carefully the change which they received from him .
The satisfaction he felt from this alteration in their manners was at first delightful to Piedro ; but in proportion to his credit , his opportunities of defrauding increased ; and these became temptations which he had not the firmness to resist .
His old manner of thinking recurred .
`` I make but a few shillings a day , and this is but slow work , '' said he to himself .
`` What signifies my good character , if I make so little by it ? ''
Light gains , and frequent , make a heavy purse , * was one of Francisco's proverbs .
But Piedro was in too great haste to get rich to take time into his account .
He set his invention to work , and he did not want for ingenuity , to devise means of cheating without running the risk of detection .
He observed that the younger part of the community were extremely fond of certain coloured sugar plums , and of burnt almonds .
* Poco e spesso empie il l'orsetto .
With the money he had earned by two months ' trading in fruit he laid in a large stock of what appeared to these little merchants a stock of almonds and sugar-plums , and he painted in capital gold coloured letters upon his board , `` Sweetest , largest , most admirable sugar-plums of all colours ever sold in Naples , to be had here ; and in gratitude to his numerous customers , Piedro adds to these , 'Burnt almonds gratis . ' '' .
This advertisement attracted the attention of all who could read ; and many who could not read heard it repeated with delight .
Crowds of children surrounded Piedro 's board of promise , and they all went away the first day amply satisfied .
Each had a full measure of coloured sugar- plums at the usual price , and along with these a burnt almond gratis .
The burnt almond had such an effect upon the public judgment , that it was universally allowed that the sugar-plums were , as the advertisement set forth , the largest , sweetest , most admirable ever sold in Naples ; though all the time they were , in no respect , better than any other sugar-plums .
It was generally reported that Piedro gave full measure -- fuller than any other board in the city .
He measured the sugar-plums in a little cubical tin box ; and this , it was affirmed , he heaped up to the top , and pressed down before he poured out the contents into the open hands of his approving customers .
This belief , and Piedro 's popularity , continued longer even than he had expected ; and , as he thought his sugar-plums had secured their reputation with the GENEROUS PUBLIC , he gradually neglected to add burnt almonds gratis .
One day a boy of about ten years old passed carelessly by , whistling as he went along , and swinging a carpenter 's rule in his hand .
`` Ha !
what have we here ? ''
cried he , stopping to read what was written on Piedro's board .
`` This promises rarely .
Old as I am , and tall of my age , which makes the matter worse , I am still as fond of sugar-plums as my little sister , who is five years younger than I . Come , Signor , fill me quick , for I 'm in haste to taste them , two measures of the sweetest , largest , most admirable sugar-plums in Naples -- one measure for myself and one for my little Rosetta . ''
`` You 'll pay for yourself and your sister , then , '' said Piedro , `` for no credit is given here . ''
`` No credit do I ask , '' replied the lively boy ; `` when I told you I loved sugar-plums , did I tell you I loved them , or even my sister , so well as to run in debt for them ?
Here 's for myself , and here 's for my sister's share , '' said he , laying down his money ; `` and now for the burnt almonds gratis , my good fellow . ''
`` They are all out ; I have been out of burnt almonds this great while , '' said Piedro .
`` Then why are they in your advertisement here ? ''
said Carlo .
`` I have not had time to scratch them out of the board . ''
`` What !
not when you have , by your own account , been out of them a great while ?
I did not know it required so much time to blot out a few words -- let us try .
`` ; and as he spoke , Carlo , for that was the name of Piedro's new customer , pulled a bit of white chalk out of his pocket , and drew a broad score across the line on the board which promised burnt almonds gratis .
`` You are most impatient , '' said Piedro ; `` I shall have a fresh stock of almonds to-morrow . ''
`` Why must the board tell a lie to-day ? ''
`` It would ruin me to alter it , '' said Piedro .
`` A lie may ruin you , but I could scarcely think the truth could . ''
`` You have no right to meddle with me or my board , '' said Piedro , put off his guard , and out of his usual soft voice of civility , by this last observation .
`` My character , and that of my board , are too firmly established now for any chance customer like you to injure . ''
`` I never dreamed of injuring you or anyone else , '' said Carlo -- '' I wish , moreover , you may not injure yourself .
Do as you please with your board , but give me my sugar-plums , for I have some right to meddle with those , having paid for them . ''
`` Hold out your hand , then . ''
`` No , put them in here , if you please ; put my sister 's , at least , in here ; she likes to have them in this box : I bought some for her in it yesterday , and she 'll think they 'll taste the better out of the same box .
But how is this ?
your measure does not fill my box nearly ; you give us very few sugar-plums for our money . ''
`` I give you full measure , as I give to everybody . ''
`` The measure should be an inch cube , I know , '' said Carlo ; `` that 's what all the little merchants have agreed to , you know . ''
`` True , '' said Piedro , `` so it is . ''
`` And so it is , I must allow , '' said Carlo , measuring the outside of it with the carpenter 's rule which he held in his hand .
`` An inch every way ; and yet by my eye -- and I have no bad one , being used to measuring carpenter 's work for my father -- by my eye I should think this would have held more sugar-plums . ''
`` The eye often deceives us ; '' said Piedro .
`` There 's nothing like measuring , you find . ''
`` There 's nothing like measuring , I find , indeed , '' replied Carlo , as he looked closely at the end of his rule , which , since he spoke last , he had put into the cube to take its depth in the inside .
`` This is not as deep by a quarter of an inch , Signor Piedro , measured within as it is measured without . ''
Piedro changed colour terribly , and seizing hold of the tin box , endeavoured to wrest it from the youth who measured so accurately .
Carlo held his prize fast , and lifting it above his head , he ran into the midst of the square where the little market was held , exclaiming , `` A discovery !
a discovery !
that concerns all who love sugar-plums .
A discovery !
a discovery that concerns all who have ever bought the sweetest , and most admirable sugar-plums ever sold in Naples . ''
The crowd gathered from all parts of the square as he spoke .
`` We have bought , '' and `` We have bought of those sugar-plums , '' cried several little voices at once , `` if you mean Piedro 's . ''
`` The same , '' continued Carlo -- '' he who , out of gratitude to his numerous customers , gives , or promises to give , burnt almonds gratis . ''
`` Excellent they were ! ''
cried several voices .
`` We all know Piedro well ; but what 's your discovery ? ''
`` My discovery is , '' said Carlo , `` that you , none of you , know Piedro .
Look you here ; look at this box -- this is his measure ; it has a false bottom -- it holds only three-quarters as much as it ought to do ; and his numerous customers have all been cheated of one-quarter of every measure of the admirable sugar-plums they have bought from him .
'Think twice of a good bargain , ' says the proverb . ''
`` So we have been finely duped , indeed , '' cried some of the bystanders , looking at one another with a mortified air .
`` Full of courtesy , full of craft ! ''
* `` So this is the meaning of his burnt almonds gratis , '' cried others ; all joined in an uproar of indignation , except one , who , as he stood behind the rest , expressed in his countenance silent surprise and sorrow .
* Chi et FA pi caress che non vole , O ingannato t'ha , o inganuar et vole .
`` Is this Piedro a relation of yours ? ''
said Carlo , going up to this silent person .
`` I am sorry , if he be , that I have published his disgrace , for I would not hurt YOU .
You do n't sell sugar-plums as he does , I 'm sure ; for my little sister Rosetta has often bought from you .
Can this Piedro be a friend of yours ? ''
`` I wished to have been his friend ; but I see I ca n't , '' said Francisco .
`` He is a neighbour of ours , and I pitied him ; but since he is at his old tricks again , there 's an end of the matter .
I have reason to be obliged to you , for I was nearly taken in .
He has behaved so well for some time past , that I intended this very evening to have gone to him , and to have told him that I was willing to do for him what he has long begged of me to do -- to enter into partnership with him . ''
`` Francisco !
Francisco ! -- your measure , lend us your measure ! ''
exclaimed a number of little merchants crowding round him .
`` You have a measure for sugar-plums ; and we have all agreed to refer to that , and to see how much we have been cheated before we go to break Piedro 's bench and declare him bankrupt , * -- the punishment for all knaves . ''
* This word comes from two Italian words , bunco rotto -- broken bench .
Bankers and merchants used formerly to count their money , and write their bills of exchange upon benches in the streets ; and when a merchant or banker lost his credit , and was unable to pay his debts , his bench was broken .
They pressed on to Francisco 's board , obtained his measure , found that it held something more than a quarter above the quantity that could be contained in Piedro 's .
The cries of the enraged populace were now most clamorous .
They hung the just and the unjust measures upon high poles ; and , forming themselves into a formidable phalanx , they proceeded towards Piedro 's well known yellow lettered board , exclaiming , as they went along , `` Common cause !
common cause !
The little Neapolitan merchants will have no knaves amongst them !
Break his bench !
break his bench !
He is a bankrupt in honesty . ''
Piedro saw the mob , heard the indignant clamour , and , terrified at the approach of numbers , he fled with the utmost precipitation , having scarcely time to pack up half his sugar-plums .
There was a prodigious number , more than would have filled many honest measures , scattered upon the ground and trampled under foot by the crowd .
Piedro 's bench was broken , and the public vengeance wreaked itself also upon his treacherous painted board .
It was , after being much disfigured by various inscriptions expressive of the universal contempt for Piedro , hung up in a conspicuous part of the market-place ; and the false measure was fastened like a cap upon one of its corners .
Piedro could never more show his face in this market , and all hopes of friendship -- all hopes of partnership with Francisco -- were for ever at an end .
If rogues would calculate , they would cease to be rogues ; for they would certainly discover that it is most for their interest to be honest -- setting aside the pleasure of being esteemed and beloved , of having a safe conscience , with perfect freedom from all the various embarrassments and terror to which knaves are subject .
Is it not clear that our crafty hero would have gained rather more by a partnership with Francisco , and by a fair character , than he could possibly obtain by fraudulent dealing in comfits ?
When the mob had dispersed , after satisfying themselves with executing summary justice upon Piedro 's bench and board , Francisco found a carpenter 's rule lying upon the ground near Piedro 's broken bench , which he recollected to have seen in the hands of Carlo .
He examined it carefully , and he found Carlo 's name written upon it , and the name of the street where he lived ; and though it was considerably out of his way , he set out immediately to restore the rule , which was a very handsome one , to its rightful owner .
After a hot walk through several streets , he overtook Carlo , who had just reached the door of his own house .
Carlo was particularly obliged to him , he said , for restoring this rule to him , as it was a present from the master of a vessel , who employed his father to do carpenter 's work for him .
`` One should not praise one 's self , they say , '' continued Carlo , `` but I long so much to gain your good opinion , that I must tell you the whole history of the rule you have restored .
It was given to me for having measured the work and made up the bill of a whole pleasure-boat myself .
You may guess I should have been sorry enough to have lost it .
Thank you for its being once more in my careless hands , and tell me , I beg , whenever I can do you any service .
By-the-by , I can make up for you a fruit stall .
I 'll do it to-morrow , and it shall be the admiration of the market .
Is there anything else you could think of for me ? ''
`` Why , yes , '' said Francisco ; `` since you are so good-natured , perhaps you'd be kind enough to tell me the meaning of some of those lines and figures that I see upon your rule .
I have a great curiosity to know their use . ''
`` That I 'll explain to you with pleasure , as far as I know them myself ; but when I 'm at fault , my father , who is cleverer than I am , and understands trigonometry , can help us out . ''
`` Trigonometry ! ''
repeated Francisco , not a little alarmed at the high sounding word ; `` that 's what I certainly shall never understand . ''
`` Oh , never fear , '' replied Carlo , laughing .
`` I looked just as you do now- -I felt just as you do now -- all in a fright and a puzzle , when I first heard of angles and sines , and cosines , and arcs and centres , and complements and tangents . ''
`` Oh mercy !
mercy ! ''
interrupted Francisco , whilst Carlo laughed , with a benevolent sense of superiority .
`` Why , '' said Carlo , `` you 'll find all these things are nothing when you are used to them .
But I can not explain my rule to you here broiling in the sun .
Besides , it will not be the work of a day , I promise you ; but come and see us at your leisure hours , and we 'll study it together .
I have a great notion we shall become friends ; and , to begin , step in with me now , '' said Carlo , `` and eat a little macaroni with us .
I know it is ready by this time .
Besides , you 'll see my father , and he 'll show you plenty of rules and compasses , as you like such things ; and then I 'll go home with you in the cool of the evening , and you shall show me your melons and vines , and teach me , in time , something of gardening .
Oh , I see we must be good friends , just made for each other ; so come in -- no ceremony . ''
Carlo was not mistaken in his predictions ; he and Francisco became very good friends , spent all their leisure hours together , either in Carlo's workshop or in Francisco 's vineyard , and they mutually improved each other .
Francisco , before he saw his friend 's rule , knew but just enough of arithmetic to calculate in his head the price of the fruit which he sold in the market ; but with Carlo 's assistance , and the ambition to understand the tables and figures upon the wonderful rule , he set to work in earnest , and in due time , satisfied both himself and his master .
`` Who knows but these things that I am learning now may be of some use to me before I die ? ''
said Francisco , as he was sitting one morning with his tutor , the carpenter .
`` To be sure it will , '' said the carpenter , putting down his compasses , with which he was drawing a circle -- '' Arithmetic is a most useful , and I was going to say necessary thing to be known by men in all stations ; and a little trigonometry does no harm .
In short , my maxim is , that no knowledge comes amiss ; for a man 's head is of as much use to him as his hands ; and even more so .
`` A word to the wise will always suffice . ''
`` Besides , to say nothing of making a fortune , is not there a great pleasure in being something of a scholar , and being able to pass one's time with one 's book , and one 's compasses and pencil ?
Safe companions these for young and old .
No one gets into mischief that has pleasant things to think of and to do when alone ; and I know , for my part , that trigonometry is -- '' Here the carpenter , just as he was going to pronounce a fresh panegyric upon his favourite trigonometry , was interrupted by the sudden entrance of his little daughter Rosetta , all in tears : a very unusual spectacle , for , taking the year round , she shed fewer tears than any child of her age in Naples .
`` Why , my dear good humoured little Rosetta , what has happened ?
Why these large tears ? ''
said her brother Carlo , and he went up to her , and wiped them from her cheeks .
`` And these that are going over the bridge of the nose so fast ?
I must stop these tears , too , '' said Carlo .
Rosetta , at this speech , burst out laughing , and said that she did not know till then that she had any bridge on her nose .
`` And were these shells the cause of the tears ? ''
said her brother , looking at a heap of shells , which she held before her in her frock .
`` Yes , partly , '' said Rosetta .
`` It was partly my own fault , but not all .
You know I went out to the carpenter 's yard , near the arsenal , where all the children are picking up chips and sticks so busily ; and I was as busy as any of them , because I wanted to fill my basket soon ; and then I thought I should sell my basketful directly in the little wood-market .
As soon as I had filled my basket , and made up my faggot ( which was not done , brother , till I was almost baked by the sun , for I was forced to wait by the carpenters for the bits of wood to make up my faggot ) -- I say , when it was all ready , and my basket full , I left it altogether in the yard . ''
`` That was not wise to leave it , '' said Carlo .
`` But I only left it for a few minutes , brother , and I could not think anybody would be so dishonest as to take it whilst I was away .
I only just ran to tell a boy , who had picked up all these beautiful shells upon the sea-shore , and who wanted to sell them , that I should be glad to buy them from him , if he would only be so good as to keep them for me , for an hour or so , till I had carried my wood to market , and till I had sold it , and so had money to pay him for the shells . ''
`` Your heart was set mightily on these shells , Rosetta . ''
`` Yes ; for I thought you and Francisco , brother , would like to have them for your nice grotto that you are making at Resina .
That was the reason I was in such a hurry to get them .
The boy who had them to sell was very good-natured ; he poured them into my lap , and said I had such an honest face he would trust me , and that as he was in a great hurry , he could not wait an hour whilst I sold my wood ; but that he was sure I would pay him in the evening , and he told me that he would call here this evening for the money .
But now what shall I do , Carlo ?
I shall have no money to give him : I must give back his shells , and that 's a great pity . ''
`` But how happened it that you did not sell your wood ? ''
`` Oh , I forgot ; did not I tell you that ?
When I went for my basket , do you know it was empty , quite empty , not a chip left ?
Some dishonest person had carried it all off .
Had not I reason to cry now , Carlo ? '
`` I 'll go this minute into the wood-market , and see if I can find your faggot .
Wo n't that be better than crying ? ''
said her brother .
`` Should you know any one of your pieces of wood again if you were to see them ? ''
`` Yes , one of them , I am sure , I should know again , '' said Rosetta .
`` It had a notch at one end of it , where one of the carpenters cut it off from another piece of wood for me . ''
`` And is this piece of wood from which the carpenter cut it still to be seen ? ''
said Francisco .
`` Yes , it is in the yard ; but I can not bring it to you , for it is very heavy . ''
`` We can go to it , '' said Francisco , `` and I hope we shall recover your basketful . ''
Carlo and his friend went with Rosetta immediately to the yard , near the arsenal , saw the notched piece of wood , and then proceeded to the little wood-market , and searched every heap that lay before the little factors ; but no notched bit was to be found , and Rosetta declared that she did not see one stick that looked at all like any of hers .
On their part , her companions eagerly untied their faggots to show them to her , and exclaimed , `` That they were incapable of taking what did not belong to them ; that of all persons they should never have thought of taking anything from the good natured little Rosetta , who was always ready to give to others , and to help them in making up their loads . ''
Despairing of discovering the thief , Francisco and Carlo left the market .
As they were returning home , they were met by the English servant Arthur , who asked Francisco where he had been , and where he was going .
As soon as he heard of Rosetta 's lost faggot , and of the bit of wood , notched at one end , of which Rosetta drew the shape with a piece of chalk , which her brother had lent her , Arthur exclaimed , `` I have seen such a bit of wood as this within this quarter of an hour ; but I can not recollect where .
Stay !
this was at the baker 's , I think , where I went for some rolls for my master .
It was lying beside his oven . ''
To the baker 's they all went as fast as possible , and they got there but just in time .
The baker had in his hand the bit of wood with which he was that instant going to feed his oven .
`` Stop , good Mr .
Baker ! ''
cried Rosetta , who ran into the baker 's shop first ; and as he heard `` Stop !
stop ! ''
re-echoed by many voices , the baker stopped ; and turning to Francisco , Carlo and Arthur , begged , with a countenance of some surprise , to know why they had desired him to stop .
The case was easily explained , and the baker told them that he did not buy any wood in the little market that morning ; that this faggot he had purchased between the hours of twelve and one from a lad about Francisco 's height , whom he met near the yard of the arsenal .
`` This is my bit of wood , I am sure ; I know it by this notch , '' said Rosetta .
`` Well , '' said the baker , `` if you will stay here a few minutes , you will probably see the lad who sold it to me .
He desired to be paid in bread , and my bread was not quite baked when he was here .
I bid him call again in an hour , and I fancy he will be pretty punctual , for he looked desperately hungry . ''
The baker had scarcely finished speaking when Francisco , who was standing watching at the door , exclaimed , `` Here comes Piedro !
I hope he is not the boy who sold you the wood , Mr .
Baker ? ''
`` He is the boy , though , '' replied the baker , and Piedro , who now entered the shop , started at the sight of Carlo and Francisco , whom he had never seen since the day of disgrace in the fruit-market .
`` Your servant , Signor Piedro , '' said Carlo ; `` I have the honour to tell you that this piece of wood , and all that you took out of the basket , which you found in the yard of the arsenal , belongs to my sister . ''
`` Yes , indeed , '' cried Rosetta .
Piedro being very certain that nobody saw him when he emptied Rosetta's basket , and imagining that he was suspected only upon the bare assertion of a child like Rosetta , who might be baffled and frightened out of her story , boldly denied the charge , and defied any one to prove him guilty .
`` He has a right to be heard in his own defence , '' said Arthur , with the cool justice of an Englishman ; and he stopped the angry Carlo 's arm , who was going up to the culprit with all the Italian vehemence of oratory and gesture .
Arthur went on to say something in bad Italian about the excellence of an English trial by jury , which Carlo was too much enraged to hear , but to which Francisco paid attention , and turning to Piedro , he asked him if he was willing to be judged by twelve of his equals ?
`` With all my heart , '' said Piedro , still maintaining an unmoved countenance , and they returned immediately to the little wood-market .
On their way , they had passed through the fruit-market , and crowds of those who were well acquainted with Piedro 's former transactions followed , to hear the event of the present trial .
Arthur could not , especially as he spoke wretched Italian , make the eager little merchants understand the nature and advantages of an English trial by jury .
They preferred their own summary mode of proceeding .
Francisco , in whose integrity they all had perfect confidence , was chosen with unanimous shouts for the judge ; but he declined the office , and another was appointed .
He was raised upon a bench , and the guilty but insolent looking Piedro , and the ingenuous , modest Rosetta stood before him .
She made her complaint in a very artless manner ; and Piedro , with ingenuity , which in a better cause would have deserved admiration , spoke volubly and craftily in his own defence .
But all that he could say could not alter facts .
The judge compared the notched bit of wood found at the baker 's with a piece from which it was cut , which he went to see in the yard of the arsenal .
It was found to fit exactly .
The judge then found it impossible to restrain the loud indignation of all the spectators .
The prisoner was sentenced never more to sell wood in the market ; and the moment sentence was pronounced , Piedro was hissed and hooted out of the market-place .
Thus a third time he deprived himself of the means of earning his bread .
We shall not dwell upon all his petty methods of cheating in the trades he next attempted .
He handed lemonade about in a part of Naples where he was not known , but he lost his customers by putting too much water and too little lemon into this beverage .
He then took to the waters from the sulphurous springs , and served them about to foreigners ; but one day , as he was trying to jostle a competitor from the coach door , he slipped his foot , and broke his glasses .
They had been borrowed from an old woman , who hired out glasses to the boys who sold lemonade .
Piedro knew that it was the custom to pay , of course , for all that was broken ; but this he was not inclined to do .
He had a few shillings in his pocket , and thought that it would be very clever to defraud this poor woman of her right , and to spend his shillings upon what he valued much more than he did his good name -- macaroni .
The shillings were soon gone .
We shall now for the present leave Piedro to his follies and his fate ; or , to speak more properly , to his follies and their inevitable consequences .
Francisco was all this time acquiring knowledge from his new friends , without neglecting his own or his father 's business .
He contrived , during the course of autumn and winter , to make himself a tolerable arithmetician .
Carlo 's father could draw plans in architecture neatly ; and pleased with the eagerness Francisco showed to receive instruction , he willingly put a pencil and compasses into his hand , and taught him all he knew himself .
Francisco had great perseverance , and , by repeated trials , he at length succeeded in copying exactly all the plans which his master lent him .
His copies , in time , surpassed the originals , and Carlo exclaimed , with astonishment : `` Why , Francisco , what an astonishing GENIUS you have for drawing ! -- Absolutely you draw plans better than my father ! ''
`` As to genius , '' said Francisco , honestly , `` I have none .
All that I have done has been done by hard labour .
I do n't know how other people do things ; but I am sure that I never have been able to get anything done well but by patience .
Do n't you remember , Carlo , how you and even Rosetta laughed at me the first time your father put a pencil into my awkward , clumsy hands ? ''
`` Because , '' said Carlo , laughing again at the recollection , `` you held your pencil so drolly ; and when you were to cut it , you cut it just as if you were using a pruning-knife to your vines ; but now it is your turn to laugh , for you surpass us all .
And the times are changed since I set about to explain this rule of mine to you . ''
`` Ay , that rule , '' said Francisco -- '' how much I owe to it !
Some great people , when they lose any of their fine things , cause the crier to promise a reward of so much money to anyone who shall find and restore their trinket .
How richly have you and your father rewarded me for returning this rule ! ''
Francisco 's modesty and gratitude , as they were perfectly sincere , attached his friends to him most powerfully ; but there was one person who regretted our hero 's frequent absences from his vineyard at Resina .
Not Francisco 's father , for he was well satisfied his son never neglected his business ; and as to the hours spent in Naples , he had so much confidence in Francisco that he felt no apprehensions of his getting into bad company .
When his son had once said to him , `` I spend my time at such a place , and in such and such a manner , '' he was as well convinced of its being so as if he had watched and seen him every moment of the day .
But it was Arthur who complained of Francisco 's absence .
`` I see , because I am an Englishman , '' said he , `` you do n't value my friendship , and yet that is the very reason you ought to value it ; no friends so good as the English , be it spoken without offence to your Italian friend , for whom you now continually leave me to dodge up and down here in Resina , without a soul that I like to speak to , for you are the only Italian I ever liked . ''
`` You shall like another , I promise you , '' said Francisco .
`` You must come with me to Carlo 's , and see how I spend my evenings ; then complain of me , if you can . ''
It was the utmost stretch of Arthur 's complaisance to pay this visit ; but , in spite of his national prejudices and habitual reserve of temper , he was pleased with the reception he met with from the generous Carlo and the playful Rosetta .
They showed him Francisco 's drawings with enthusiastic eagerness ; and Arthur , though no great judge of drawing , was in astonishment , and frequently repeated , `` I know a gentleman who visits my master who would like these things .
I wish I might have them to show him . ''
`` Take them , then , '' said Carlo ; `` I wish all Naples could see them , provided they might be liked half as well as I like them . ''
Arthur carried off the drawings , and one day , when his master was better than usual , and when he was at leisure , eating a dessert of Francisco's grapes , he entered respectfully , with his little portfolio under his arm , and begged permission to show his master a few drawings done by the gardener 's son , whose grapes he was eating .
Though not quite so partial a judge as the enthusiastic Carlo , this gentleman was both pleased and surprised at the sight of these drawings , considering how short a time Francisco had applied himself to this art , and what slight instructions he had received .
Arthur was desired to summon the young artist .
Francisco 's honest , open manner , joined to the proofs he had given of his abilities , and the character Arthur gave him for strict honesty , and constant kindness to his parents , interested Mr .
Lee , the name of this English gentleman , much in his favour .
Mr .
Lee was at this time in treaty with an Italian painter , whom he wished to engage to copy for him exactly some of the cornices , mouldings , tablets , and antique ornaments which are to be seen amongst the ruins of the ancient city of Herculaneum .
* * We must give those of our young English readers who may not be acquainted with the ancient city of Herculaneum , some idea of it .
None can be ignorant that near Naples is the celebrated volcanic mountain of Vesuvius ; -- that , from time to time , there happen violent eruptions from this mountain ; that is to say , flames and immense clouds of smoke issue from different openings , mouths , or CRATERS , as they are called , but more especially from the summit of the mountain , which is distinguished by the name of THE crater .
A rumbling , and afterwards a roaring noise is heard within , and prodigious quantities of stones and minerals burnt into masses ( scoriae ) , are thrown out of the crater , sometimes to a great distance .
The hot ashes from Mount Vesuvius have often been seen upon the roofs of the houses of Naples , from which it is six miles distant .
Streams of lava run down the sides of the mountains during the time of an eruption , destroying everything in their way , and overwhelm the houses and vineyards which are in the neighbourhood .
About 17OO years ago , during the reign of the Roman Emperor Titus , there happened a terrible eruption of Mount Vesuvius ; and a large city called Herculaneum , which was situated at about four miles ' distance from the volcano , was overwhelmed by the streams of lava which poured into it , filled up the streets , and quickly covered over the tops of the houses , so that the whole was no more visible .
It remained for many years buried .
The lava which covered it became in time fit for vegetation , plants grew there , a new soil was formed , and a new town called Portici was built over this place where Herculaneum formerly stood .
The little village of Resina is also situated near the spot .
About fifty years ago , in a poor man 's garden at Resina , a hole in a well about thirty feet below the surface of the earth was observed .
Some persons had the curiosity to enter into this hole , and , after creeping underground for some time , they came to the foundations of houses .
The peasants , inhabitants of the village , who had probably never heard of Herculaneum , were somewhat surprised at their discovery .
* * About the same time , in a pit in the town of Portici , a similar passage underground was discovered , and , by orders of the King of Naples , workmen were employed to dig away the earth , and clear the passage .
They found , at length , the entrance into the town , which , during the reign of Titus , was buried under lava .
It was about eighty-eight Neapolitan palms ( a palm contains near nine inches ) below the top of the pit .
The workmen , as they cleared the passages , marked their way with chalk when they came to any turning , lest they should lose themselves .
The streets branched out in many directions , and , lying across them , the workmen often found large pieces of timber , beams , and rafters ; some broken in the fall , others entire .
These beams and rafters are burned quite black like charcoal , except those that were found in moist places , which have more the colour of rotten wood , and which are like a soft paste , into which you might run your hand .
The walls of the houses slant , some one way , some another , and some are upright .
Several magnificent buildings of brick , faced with marble of different colours , are partly seen , where the workmen have cleared away the earth and lava with which they were encrusted .
Columns of red and white marble , and flights of steps , are seen in different places ; and out of the ruins of the palaces some very fine statues and pictures have been dug .
Foreigners who visit Naples are very curious to see this subterraneous city , and are desirous to carry with them into their own country some proofs of their having examined this wonderful place .
* * Philosophical Transactions , vol .
ix .
p .
440 .
CHAPTER III .
Tutte le gran faciende si fanno di poca cosa .
What great events from trivial causes spring .
Signor Camillo , the artist employed by Mr .
Lee to copy some of the antique ornaments in Herculaneum , was a liberal minded man , perfectly free from that mean jealousy which would repress the efforts of rising genius .
`` Here is a lad scarcely fifteen , a poor gardener 's son , who , with merely the instructions he could obtain from a common carpenter , has learned to draw these plans and elevations , which you see are tolerably neat .
What an advantage your instruction would be to him , '' said Mr .
Lee , as he introduced Francisco to Signor Camillo .
`` I am interested in this lad from what I have learned of his good conduct .
I hear he is strictly honest , and one of the best of sons .
Let us do something for him .
If you will give him some knowledge of your art , I will , as far as money can recompense you for your loss of time , pay whatever you may think reasonable for his instruction . ''
Signor Camillo made no difficulties ; he was pleased with his pupil's appearance , and every day he liked him better and better .
In the room where they worked together there were some large books of drawings and plates , which Francisco saw now and then opened by his master , and which he had a great desire to look over ; but when he was left in the room by himself he never touched them , because he had not permission .
Signor Camillo , the first day he came into this room with his pupil , said to him , `` Here are many valuable books and drawings , young man .
I trust , from the character I have heard of you , that they will be perfectly safe here . ''
Some weeks after Francisco had been with the painter , they had occasion to look for the front of a temple in one of these large books .
`` What !
do n't you know in which book to look for it , Francisco ? ''
cried his master , with some impatience .
`` Is it possible that you have been here so long with these books , and that you can not find the print I mean ?
Had you half the taste I gave you credit for , you would have singled it out from all the rest , and have it fixed in your memory . ''
`` But , signor , I never saw it , '' said Francisco , respectfully , `` or , perhaps , I should have preferred it . ''
`` That you never saw it , young man , is the very thing of which I complain .
Is a taste for the arts to be learned , think you , by looking at the cover of a book like this ?
Is it possible that you never thought of opening it ? ''
`` Often and often , '' cried Francisco , `` have I longed to open it ; but I thought it was forbidden me , and however great my curiosity in your absence , I have never touched them .
I hoped indeed , that the time would come when you would have the goodness to show them to me . ''
`` And so the time is come , excellent young man , '' cried Camillo ; `` much as I love taste , I love integrity more .
I am now sure of your having the one , and let me see whether you have , as I believe you have , the other .
Sit you down here beside me ; and we will look over these books together . ''
The attention with which his young pupil examined everything , and the pleasure he unaffectedly expressed in seeing these excellent prints , sufficiently convinced his judicious master that it was not from the want of curiosity or taste that he had never opened these tempting volumes .
His confidence in Francisco was much increased by this circumstance , slight as it may appear .
One day , Signor Camillo came behind Francisco , as he was drawing with much intentness , and tapping him upon the shoulder , he said to him : `` Put up your pencils and follow me , I can depend upon your integrity ; I have pledged myself for it .
Bring your note-book with you , and follow me ; I will this day show you something that will entertain you at least as much as my large book of prints .
Follow me . ''
Francisco followed , till they came to the pit near the entrance of Herculaneum .
`` I have obtained leave for you to accompany me , '' said his master , `` and you know , I suppose , that this is not a permission granted to everyone ? ''
Paintings of great value , besides ornaments of gold and silver , antique bracelets , rings , etc. , are from time to time found amongst these ruins , and therefore it is necessary that no person should be admitted whose honesty can not be depended upon .
Thus , even Francisco 's talents could not have advanced him in the world , unless they had been united to integrity .
He was much delighted and astonished by the new scene that was now opened to his view ; and as , day after day , he accompanied his master to this subterraneous city , he had leisure for observation .
He was employed , as soon as he had gratified his curiosity , in drawing .
There are niches in the walls in several places , from which pictures have been dug , and these niches are often adorned with elegant masques , figures and animals , which have been left by the ignorant or careless workmen , and which are going fast to destruction .
Signor Camillo , who was copying these for his English employer , had a mind to try his pupil 's skill , and , pointing to a niche bordered with grotesque figures , he desired him to try if he could make any hand of it .
Francisco made several trials , and at last finished such an excellent copy , that his enthusiastic and generous master , with warm encomiums , carried it immediately to his patron , and he had the pleasure to receive from Mr .
Lee a purse containing five guineas , as a reward and encouragement for his pupil .
Francisco had no sooner received this money , than he hurried to his father and mother 's cottage .
His mother , some months before this time , had taken a small dairy farm ; and her son had once heard her express a wish that she was but rich enough to purchase a remarkably fine brindled cow , which belonged to a farmer in the neighbourhood .
`` Here , my dear mother , '' cried Francisco , pouring the guineas into her lap ; `` and here , '' continued he , emptying a bag which contained about as much more , in small Italian coins , the profits of trade-money he had fairly earned during the two years he sold fruit amongst the little Neapolitan merchants ; `` this is all yours , dearest mother , and I hope it will be enough to pay for the brindled cow .
Nay , you must not refuse me- -I have set my heart upon the cow being milked by you this very evening ; and I 'll produce my best bunches of grapes , and my father , perhaps , will give us a melon ; for I 've had no time for melons this season ; and I'll step to Naples and invite -- may I , mother ? -- my good friends , dear Carlo and your favourite little Rosetta , and my old drawing master , and my friend Arthur , and we 'll sup with you at your dairy . ''
The happy mother thanked her son , and the father assured him that neither melon nor pine-apple should be spared , to make a supper worthy of his friends .
The brindled cow was bought , and Arthur and Carlo and Rosetta most joyfully accepted their invitation .
The carpenter had unluckily appointed to settle a long account that day with one of his employers , and he could not accompany his children .
It was a delicious evening ; they left Naples just as the sea-breeze , after the heats of the day , was most refreshingly felt .
The walk to Resina , the vineyard , the dairy , and most of all , the brindled cow , were praised by Carlo and Rosetta , with all the Italian superlatives which signify , '' Most beautiful !
most delightful !
most charming ! ''
Whilst the English Arthur , with as warm a heart , was more temperate in his praise , declaring that this was `` the most like an English summer 's evening of any he had ever felt since he came to Italy : and that , moreover , the cream was almost as good as what he had been used to drink in Cheshire . ''
The company , who were all pleased with each other , and with the gardener's good fruit , which he produced in great abundance , did not think of separating till late .
It was a bright moonlight night , and Carlo asked his friend if he would walk with them part of the way to Naples .
`` Yes , all the way most willingly , '' cried Francisco , `` that I may have the pleasure of giving to your father , with my own hands , this fine bunch of grapes , that I have reserved for him out of my own share . ''
`` Add this fine pine-apple for my share , then , '' said his father , `` and a pleasant walk to you , my young friends . ''
They proceeded gaily along , and when they reached Naples , as they passed through the square where the little merchants held their market , Francisco pointed to the spot where he found Carlo 's rule .
He never missed an opportunity of showing his friends that he did not forget their former kindness to him .
`` That rule , '' said he , `` has been the cause of all my present happiness , and I thank you for -- '' '' Oh , never mind thanking him now , '' interrupted Rosetta , `` but look yonder , and tell me what all those people are about . ''
She pointed to a group of men , women and children , who were assembled under a piazza , listening in various attitudes of attention to a man , who was standing upon a flight of steps speaking in a loud voice , and with much action , to the people who surrounded him .
Francisco , Carlo and Rosetta joined his audience .
The moon shone full upon his countenance , which was very expressive and which varied frequently according to the characters of the persons whose history he was telling , according to all the changes of their fortune .
This man was one of those who are called Improvisatori -- persons who , in Italian towns , go about reciting verses or telling stories , which they are supposed to invent as they go on speaking .
Some of these people speak with great fluency , and collect crowds round them in the public streets .
When an Improvisatore sees the attention of his audience fixed , and when he comes to some very interesting part of his narrative , he dexterously drops his hat upon the ground , and pauses till his auditors have paid tribute to his eloquence .
When he thinks the hat sufficiently full , he takes it up again , and proceeds with his story .
The hat was dropped just as Francisco and his two friends came under the piazza .
The orator had finished one story , and was going to commence another .
He fixed his eyes upon Francisco , then glanced at Carlo and Rosetta , and after a moment's consideration he began a story which bore some resemblance to one that our young English readers may , perhaps , know by the name of `` Cornaro , or the Grateful Turk . ''
Francisco was deeply interested in this narrative , and when the hat was dropped , he eagerly threw in his contribution .
At the end of the story , when the speaker 's voice stopped , there was a momentary silence , which was broken by the orator himself , who exclaimed , as he took up the hat which lay at his feet , `` My friends , here is some mistake !
this is not my hat ; it has been changed whilst I was taken up with my story .
Pray , gentlemen , find my hat amongst you ; it was a remarkably good one , a present from a nobleman for an epigram I made .
I would not lose my hat for twice its value .
It has my name written withinside of it , Dominicho , Improvisatore .
Pray , gentlemen , examine your hats . ''
Everybody present examined their hats , and showed them to Dominicho , but his was not amongst them .
No one had left the company ; the piazza was cleared , and searched in vain .
`` The hat has vanished by magic , '' said Dominicho .
`` Yes , and by the same magic a statue moves , '' cried Carlo , pointing to a figure standing in a niche , which had hitherto escaped observation .
The face was so much in the shade , that Carlo did not at first perceive that the statue was Piedro .
Piedro , when he saw himself discovered , burst into a loud laugh , and throwing down Dominicho 's hat , which he held in his hand behind him , cried , `` A pretty set of novices !
Most excellent players at hide-and-seek you would make . ''
Whether Piedro really meant to have carried off the poor man 's hat , or whether he was , as he said , merely in jest , we leave it to those who know his general character to decide .
Carlo shook his head .
`` Still at your old tricks , Piedro , '' said he .
`` Remember the old proverb : No fox so cunning but he comes to the furrier 's at last . ''
* * Tutte le volpi si trovano in pellicera .
`` I defy the furrier and you , too , '' replied Piedro , taking up his own ragged hat .
`` I have no need to steal hats ; I can afford to buy better than you 'll have upon your head .
Francisco , a word with you , if you have done crying at the pitiful story you have been listening to so attentively . ''
`` And what would you say to me ? ''
said Francisco , following him a few steps .
`` Do not detain me long , because my friends will wait for me . ''
`` If they are friends , they can wait , '' said Piedro .
`` You need not be ashamed of being seen in my company now , I can tell you ; for I am , as I always told you I should be , the richest man of the two . ''
`` Rich !
you rich ? ''
cried Francisco .
`` Well , then , it was impossible you could mean to trick that poor man out of his good hat . ''
`` Impossible ! ''
said Piedro .
Francisco did not consider that those who have habits of pilfering continue to practise them often , when the poverty which first tempted them to dishonesty ceases .
`` Impossible !
You stare when I tell you I am rich ; but the thing is so .
Moreover , I am well with my father at home .
I have friends in Naples , and I call myself Piedro the Lucky .
Look you here , '' said he , producing an old gold coin .
`` This does not smell of fish , does it ?
My father is no longer a fisherman , nor I either .
Neither do I sell sugar-plums to children : nor do I slave myself in a vineyard , like some folks ; but fortune , when I least expected it , has stood my friend .
I have many pieces of gold like this .
Digging in my father 's garden , it was my luck to come to an old Roman vessel full of gold .
I have this day agreed for a house in Naples for my father .
We shall live , whilst we can afford it , like great folks , you will see ; and I shall enjoy the envy that will be felt by some of my old friends , the little Neapolitan merchants , who will change their note when they see my change of fortune .
What say you to all this , Francisco the Honest ? ''
`` That I wish you joy of your prosperity , and hope you may enjoy it long and well . ''
`` Well , no doubt of that .
Everyone who has it enjoys it WELL .
He always dances well to whom fortune pipes . ''
* * Assai ben balla a chi fortuna suona .
`` Yes , no longer pipe , no longer dance , '' replied Francisco ; and here they parted ; for Piedro walked away abruptly , much mortified to perceive that his prosperity did not excite much envy , or command any additional respect from Francisco .
`` I would rather , '' said Francisco , when he returned to Carlo and Rosetta , who waited for him under the portico , where he left them -- '' I would rather have such good friends as you , Carlo and Arthur , and some more I could name , and , besides that , have a clear conscience , and work honestly for my bread , than be as lucky as Piedro .
Do you know he has found a treasure , he says , in his father 's garden -- a vase full of gold ?
He showed me one of the gold pieces . ''
`` Much good may they do him .
I hope he came honestly by them , '' said Carlo ; `` but ever since the affair of the double measure , I suspect double-dealing always from him .
It is not our affair , however .
Let him make himself happy his way , and we ours .
`` He that would live in peace and rest , Must hear , and see , and say the best . ''
* * Odi , vedi , taci , se vuoi viver in pace .
All Piedro 's neighbours did not follow this peaceable maxim ; for when he and his father began to circulate the story of the treasure found in the garden , the village of Resina did not give them implicit faith .
People nodded and whispered , and shrugged their shoulders ; then crossed themselves , and declared that they would not , for all the riches of Naples , change places with either Piedro or his father .
Regardless , or pretending to be regardless , of these suspicions , Piedro and his father persisted in their assertions .
The fishing-nets were sold , and everything in their cottage was disposed of ; they left Resina , went to live at Naples , and , after a few weeks , the matter began to be almost forgotten in the village .
The old gardener , Francisco 's father , was one of those who endeavoured to THINK THE BEST ; and all that he said upon the subject was , that he would not exchange Francisco the Honest for Piedro the Lucky ; that one can't judge of the day till one sees the evening as well as the morning .
* * La vita il fine , -- e di loda la sera .
`` Compute the morn and evening of their day . '' -- Pope .
Not to leave our readers longer in suspense , we must inform them that the peasants of Resina were right in their suspicions .
Piedro had never found any treasure in his father 's garden , but he came by his gold in the following manner : -- After he was banished from the little wood-market for stealing Rosetta's basketful of wood , after he had cheated the poor woman , who let glasses out to hire , out of the value of the glasses which he broke , and , in short , after he had entirely lost his credit with all who knew him , he roamed about the streets of Naples , reckless of what became of him .
He found the truth of the proverb , `` that credit lost is like a Venice glass broken -- it ca n't be mended again . ''
The few shillings which he had in his pocket supplied him with food for a few days .
At last he was glad to be employed by one of the peasants who came to Naples to load their asses with manure out of the streets .
They often follow very early in the morning , or during the night-time , the trace of carriages that are gone , or that are returning from the opera ; and Piedro was one night at this work , when the horses of a nobleman 's carriage took fright at the sudden blaze of some fireworks .
The carriage was overturned near him ; a lady was taken out of it , and was hurried by her attendants into a shop , where she stayed till her carriage was set to rights .
She was too much alarmed for the first ten minutes after her accident to think of anything ; but after some time , she perceived that she had lost a valuable diamond cross , which she had worn that night at the opera .
She was uncertain where she had dropped it ; the shop , the carriage , the street , were searched for it in vain .
Piedro saw it fall as the lady was lifted out of the carriage , seized upon it , and carried it off .
Ignorant as he was of the full value of what he had stolen , he knew not how to satisfy himself as to this point , without trusting someone with the secret .
After some hesitation , he determined to apply to a Jew , who , as it was whispered , was ready to buy everything that was offered to him for sale , without making any TROUBLESOME inquiries .
It was late ; he waited till the streets were cleared , and then knocked softly at the back door of the Jew 's house .
The person who opened the door for Piedro was his own father .
Piedro started back ; but his father had fast hold of him .
`` What brings you here ? ''
said the father , in a low voice , a voice which expressed fear and rage mixed .
`` Only to ask my way -- my shortest way , '' stammered Piedro .
`` No equivocations !
Tell me what brings you here at this time of the night ?
I WILL know . ''
Piedro , who felt himself in his father 's grasp , and who knew that his father would certainly search him , to find out what he had brought to sell , thought it most prudent to produce the diamond cross .
His father could but just see its lustre by the light of a dim lamp , which hung over their heads in the gloomy passage in which they stood .
`` You would have been duped , if you had gone to sell this to the Jew .
It is well it has fallen into my hands .
How came you by it ? ''
Piedro answered that he had found it in the street .
`` Go your ways home , then , '' said his father ; `` it is safe with me .
Concern yourself no more about it . ''
Piedro was not inclined thus to relinquish his booty , and he now thought proper to vary in his account of the manner in which he found the cross .
He now confessed that it had dropped from the dress of a lady , whose carriage was overturned as she was coming home from the opera , and he concluded by saying that , if his father took his prize from him without giving him his share of the profits , he would go directly to the shop where the lady stopped whilst her servants were raising the carriage , and that he would give notice of his having found the cross .
Piedro 's father saw that his SMART son , though scarcely sixteen years of age , was a match for him in villainy .
He promised him that he should have half of whatever the Jew would give for the diamonds , and Piedro insisted upon being present at the transaction .
We do not wish to lay open to our young readers scenes of iniquity .
It is sufficient to say that the Jew , who was a man old in all the arts of villainy , contrived to cheat both his associates , and obtained the diamond cross for less than half its value .
The matter was managed so that the transaction remained undiscovered .
The lady who lost the cross , after making fruitless inquiries , gave up the search , and Piedro and his father rejoiced in the success of their manoeuvres .
It is said , that `` Ill gotten wealth is quickly spent '' ; * and so it proved in this instance .
Both father and son lived a riotous life as long as their money lasted , and it did not last many months .
What his bad education began , bad company finished , and Piedro 's mind was completely ruined by the associates with whom he became connected during what he called his PROSPERITY .
When his money was at an end , these unprincipled friends began to look cold upon him , and at last plainly told him -- '' If you mean to LIVE WITH US , you must LIVE AS WE DO . ''
They lived by robbery .
* Vien presto consumato l'ingiustamente acquistato .
Piedro , though familiarized to the idea of fraud , was shocked at the thought of becoming a robber by profession .
How difficult it is to stop in the career of vice !
Whether Piedro had power to stop , or whether he was hurried on by his associates , we shall , for the present , leave in doubt .
CHAPTER IV We turn with pleasure from Piedro the Cunning to Francisco the Honest .
Francisco continued the happy and useful course of his life .
By his unremitting perseverance , he improved himself rapidly under the instructions of his master and friend , Signor Camillo ; his friend , we say , for the fair and open character of Francisco won , or rather earned , the friendship of this benevolent artist .
The English gentleman seemed to take a pride in our hero 's success and good conduct .
He was not one of those patrons who think that they have done enough when they have given five guineas .
His servant Arthur always considered every generous action of his master 's as his own , and was particularly pleased whenever this generosity was directed towards Francisco .
As for Carlo and the little Rosetta , they were the companions of all the pleasant walks which Francisco used to take in the cool of the evening , after he had been shut up all day at his work .
And the old carpenter , delighted with the gratitude of his pupil , frequently repeated -- '' that he was proud to have given the first instructions to such a GENIUS ; and that he had always prophesied Francisco would be a GREAT man . ''
`` And a good man , papa , '' said Rosetta ; `` for though he has grown so great , and though he goes into palaces now , to say nothing of that place underground , where he has leave to go , yet , notwithstanding all this , he never forgets my brother Carlo and you . ''
`` That 's the way to have good friends , '' said the carpenter .
`` And I like his way ; he does more than he says .
Facts are masculine , and words are feminine . ''
* * I fatti sono maschii , le parole femmine .
These goods friends seemed to make Francisco happier than Piedro could be made by his stolen diamonds .
One morning , Francisco was sent to finish a sketch of the front of an ancient temple , amongst the ruins of Herculaneum .
He had just reached the pit , and the men were about to let him down with cords , in the usual manner , when his attention was caught by the shrill sound of a scolding woman 's voice .
He looked , and saw at some paces distant this female fury , who stood guarding the windlass of a well , to which , with threatening gestures and most voluble menaces , she forbade all access .
The peasants -- men , women and children , who had come with their pitchers to draw water at this well -- were held at bay by the enraged female .
Not one dared to be the first to advance ; whilst she grasped with one hand the handle of the windlass , and , with the other tanned muscular arm extended , governed the populace , bidding them remember that she was padrona , or mistress of the well .
They retired , in hopes of finding a more gentle padrona at some other well in the neighbourhood ; and the fury , when they were out of sight , divided the long black hair which hung over her face , and , turning to one of the spectators , appealed to them in a sober voice , and asked if she was not right in what she had done ?
`` I , that am padrona of the well , '' said she , addressing herself to Francisco , who , with great attention , was contemplating her with the eye of a painter -- '' I , that am padrona of the well , must in times of scarcity do strict justice , and preserve for ourselves alone the water of our well .
There is scarcely enough even for ourselves .
I have been obliged to make my husband lengthen the ropes every day for this week past .
If things go on at this rate , there will soon be not one drop of water left in my well . ''
`` Nor in any of the wells of the neighbourhood , '' added one of the workmen , who was standing by ; and he mentioned several in which the water had lately suddenly decreased ; and a miller affirmed that his mill had stopped for want of water .
Francisco was struck by these remarks .
They brought to his recollection similar facts , which he had often heard his father mention in his childhood , as having been observed previous to the last eruption of Mount Vesuvius .
* He had also heard from his father , in his childhood , that it is better to trust to prudence than to fortune ; and therefore , though the peasants and workmen , to whom he mentioned his fears , laughed , and said , '' That as the burning mountain had been favourable to them for so many years , they would trust to it and St .
Januarius one day longer , '' yet Francisco immediately gave up all thoughts of spending this day amidst the ruins of Herculaneum .
After having inquired sufficiently , after having seen several wells , in which the water had evidently decreased , and after having seen the mill-wheels that were standing still for want of their usual supply , he hastened home to his father and mother , reported what he had heard and seen , and begged of them to remove , and to take what things of value they could to some distance from the dangerous spot where they now resided .
* Phil .
Trans .
vol .
ix .
Some of the inhabitants of Resina , whom he questioned , declared that they had heard strange rumbling noises underground ; and a peasant and his son , who had been at work the preceding day in a vineyard , a little above the village , related that they had seen a sudden puff of smoke come out of the earth , close to them ; and that they had , at the same time , heard a noise like the going off of a pistol .
* * These facts are mentioned in Sir William Hamilton 's account of an eruption of Mount Vesuvius. -- See Phil .
Trans .
1795 , first part .
The villagers listened with large eyes and open ears to these relations ; yet such was their habitual attachment to the spot they lived upon , or such the security in their own good fortune , that few of them would believe that there could be any necessity for removing. -- '' We 'll see what will happen to-morrow ; we shall be safe here one day longer , '' said they .
Francisco 's father and mother , more prudent than the generality of their neighbours , went to the house of a relation , at some miles ' distance from Vesuvius , and carried with them all their effects .
In the meantime , Francisco went to the villa where his English friends resided .
The villa was in a most dangerous situation , near Terre del Greco -- a town that stands at the foot of Mount Vesuvius .
He related all the facts that he had heard to Arthur , who , not having been , like the inhabitants of Resina , familiarized to the idea of living in the vicinity of a burning mountain , and habituated to trust in St .
Januarius , was sufficiently alarmed by Francisco 's representations .
He ran to his master 's apartment , and communicated all that he had just heard .
The Count de Flora and his lady , who were at this time in the house , ridiculed the fears of Arthur , and could not be prevailed upon to remove even as far as Naples .
The lady was intent upon preparations for her birthday , which was to be celebrated in a few days with great magnificence at their villa ; and she observed that it would be a pity to return to town before that day , and they had everything arranged for the festival .
The prudent Englishman had not the gallantry to appear to be convinced by these arguments , and he left the place of danger .
He left it not too soon , for the next morning exhibited a scene -- a scene which we shall not attempt to describe .
We refer our young readers to the account of this dreadful eruption of Mount Vesuvius , published by Sir W. Hamilton in the `` Philosophical Transactions . ''
It is sufficient here to say that , in the space of about five hours , the wretched inhabitants of Torre del Greco saw their town utterly destroyed by the streams of burning lava which poured from the mountain .
The villa of Count de Flora , with some others , which were at a little distance from the town , escaped ; but they were absolutely surrounded by the lava .
The count and countess were obliged to fly from their house with the utmost precipitation in the night-time ; and they had not time to remove any of their furniture , their plate , clothes , or jewels .
A few days after the eruption , the surface of the lava became so cool that people could walk upon it , though several feet beneath the surface it was still exceedingly hot .
Numbers of those who had been forced from their houses now returned to the ruins to try to save whatever they could .
But these unfortunate persons frequently found their houses had been pillaged by robbers , who , in these moments of general confusion , enrich themselves with the spoils of their fellow-creatures .
`` Has the count abandoned his villa ?
and is there no one to take care of his plate and furniture ?
The house will certainly be ransacked before morning , '' said the old carpenter to Francisco , who was at his house giving him an account of their flight .
Francisco immediately went to the count 's house in warn him of his danger .
The first person he saw was Arthur , who , with a face of terror , said to him , `` Do you know what has happened ?
It is all over with Resina ! ''
`` All over with Resina !
What , has there been a fresh eruption ?
Has the lava reached Resina ? ''
`` No ; but it will inevitably be blown up .
There , '' said Arthur , pointing to a thin figure of an Italian , who stood pale and trembling , and looking up to heaven as he crossed himself repeatedly .
`` There , '' said Arthur , `` is a man who has left a parcel of his cursed rockets and fireworks , with I do n't know how much gunpowder , in the count 's house , from which we have just fled .
The wind blows that way .
One spark of fire , and the whole is blown up . ''
Francisco waited not to hear more ; but instantly , without explaining his intentions to anyone , set out for the count 's villa , and , with a bucket of water in his hand , crossed the beds of lava with which the house was encompassed ; when , reaching the hall where the rockets and gunpowder were left , he plunged them into the water , and returned with them in safety over the lava , yet warm under his feet .
What was the surprise and joy of the poor firework-maker when he saw Francisco return from this dangerous expedition !
He could scarcely believe his eyes , when he saw the rockets and the gunpowder all safe .
The count , who had given up the hopes of saving his palace , was in admiration when he heard of this instance of intrepidity , which properly saved not only his villa , but the whole village of Resina , from destruction .
These fireworks had been prepared for the celebration of the countess ' birthday , and were forgotten in the hurry of the night on which the inhabitants fled from Torre del Greco .
`` Brave young man ! ''
said the count to Francisco , `` I thank you , and shall not limit my gratitude to thanks .
You tell me that there is danger of my villa being pillaged by robbers .
It is from this moment your interest , as well as mine , to prevent their depredations ; for ( trust to my liberality ) a portion of all that is saved of mine shall be yours . ''
`` Bravo !
bravissimo ! ''
exclaimed one , who started from a recessed window in the hall where all this passed .
`` Bravo !
bravissimo ! ''
-- Francisco thought he knew the voice and the countenance of this man , who exclaimed with so much enthusiasm .
He remembered to have seen him before , but when , or where , he could not recollect .
As soon as the count left the hall , the stranger came up to Francisco .
`` Is it possible , '' said he , `` that you do n't know me ?
It is scarcely a twelvemonth since I drew tears from your eyes . ''
`` Tears from my eyes ? ''
repeated Francisco , smiling ; `` I have shed but few tears .
I have had but few misfortunes in my life . ''
The stranger answered him by two extempore Italian lines , which conveyed nearly the same idea that has been so well expressed by an English poet : -- `` To each their sufferings -- all are men Condemn 'd alike to groan ; The feeling for another 's woes , Th ' unfeeling for his own . ''
`` I know you now perfectly well , '' cried Francisco ; `` you are the Improvisatore who , one fine moonlight night last summer , told us the story of Cornaro the Turk . ''
`` The same , '' said the Improvisatore ; `` the same , though in a better dress , which I should not have thought would have made so much difference in your eyes , though it makes all the difference between man and man in the eyes of the stupid vulgar .
My genius has broken through the clouds of misfortune of late .
A few happy impromptu verses I made on the Count de Flora 's fall from his horse attracted attention .
The count patronizes me .
I am here now to learn the fate of an ode I have just composed for his lady 's birthday .
My ode was to have been set to music , and to have been performed at his villa near Torre del Greco , if these troubles had not intervened .
Now that the mountain is quiet again , people will return to their senses .
I expect to be munificently rewarded .
But , perhaps , I detain you .
Go ; I shall not forget to celebrate the heroic action you have performed this day .
I still amuse myself amongst the populace in my tattered garb late in the evenings , and I shall sound your praises through Naples in a poem I mean to recite on the late eruption of Mount Vesuvius .
Adieu . ''
The Improvisatore was as good as his word .
That evening , with more than his usual enthusiasm , he recited his verses to a great crowd of people in one of the public squares .
Amongst the crowd were several to whom the name of Francisco was well known , and by whom he was well beloved .
These were his young companions , who remembered him as a fruit-seller amongst the little merchants .
They rejoiced to hear his praises , and repeated the lines with shouts of applause .
`` Let us pass .
What is all this disturbance in the streets ? ''
said a man , pushing his way through the crowd .
A lad who held by his arm stopped suddenly on hearing the name of Francisco , which the people were repeating with so much enthusiasm .
`` Ha !
I have found at last a story that interests you more than that of Cornaro the Turk , '' cried the Improvisatore , looking in the face of the youth , who had stopped so suddenly .
`` You are the young man who , last summer , had liked to have tricked me out of my new hat .
Promise me you wo n't touch it now , '' said he , throwing down the hat at his feet , `` or you hear not one word I have to say .
Not one word of the heroic action performed at the villa of the Count de Flora , near Torre del Greco , this morning , by Signor Francisco . ''
`` SIGNOR Francisco ! ''
repeated the lad with disdain .
`` Well , let us hear what you have to tell of him , '' added he .
`` Your hat is very safe , I promise you ; I shall not touch it .
What of SIGNOR Francisco ? ''
`` SIGNOR Francisco I may , without impropriety , call him , '' said the Improvisatore , `` for he is likely to become rich enough to command the title from those who might not otherwise respect his merit . ''
`` Likely to become rich !
how ? ''
said the lad , whom our readers have probably before this time discovered to be Piedro .
`` How , pray , is he likely to become rich enough to be a signor ? ''
`` The Count de Flora has promised him a liberal portion of all the fine furniture , plate and jewels that can be saved from his villa at Torre del Greco .
Francisco is gone down hither now with some of the count's domestics to protect the valuable goods against those villainous plunderers , who robbed their fellow-creatures of what even the flames of Vesuvius would spare . ''
`` Come , we have had enough of this stuff , '' cried the man whose arm Piedro held .
`` Come away , '' and he hurried forwards .
This man was one of the villains against whom the honest orator expressed such indignation .
He was one of those with whom Piedro got acquainted during the time that he was living extravagantly upon the money he gained by the sale of the stolen diamond cross .
That robbery was not discovered ; and his success , as he called it , hardened him in guilt .
He was both unwilling and unable to withdraw himself from the bad company with whom his ill gotten wealth connected him .
He did not consider that bad company leads to the gallows .
* * La mala compagnia e quella che mena uomini a la forca .
The universal confusion which followed the eruption of Mount Vesuvius was to these villains a time of rejoicing .
No sooner did Piedro 's companion hear of the rich furniture , plate , etc. , which the imprudent orator had described as belonging to the Count de Flora 's villa , than he longed to make himself master of the whole .
`` It is a pity , '' said Piedro , `` that the count has sent Francisco , with his servants down to guard it . ''
`` And who is this Francisco of whom you seem to stand in so much awe ? ''
`` A boy , a young lad only , of about my own age ; but I know him to be sturdily honest .
The servants we might corrupt ; but even the old proverb of 'Angle with a silver hook , ' * wo n't hold good with him . ''
* Pescar col hamo d'argento .
`` And if he can not be won by fair means , he must be conquered by foul , '' said the desperate villain ; `` but if we offer him rather more than the count has already promised for his share of the booty , of course he will consult at once his safety and his interest . ''
`` No , '' said Piedro ; `` that is not his nature .
I know him from a child , and we had better think of some other house for to-night 's business . ''
`` None other ; none but this , '' cried his companion , with an oath .
`` My mind is determined upon this , and you must obey your leader : recollect the fate of him who failed me yesterday . ''
The person to whom he alluded was one of the gang of robbers who had been assassinated by his companions for hesitating to commit some crime suggested by their leader .
No tyranny is so dreadful as that which is exercised by villains over their young accomplices , who become their slaves .
Piedro , who was of a cowardly nature , trembled at the threatening countenance of his captain , and promised submission .
In the course of the morning , inquiries were made secretly amongst the count 's servants ; and the two men who were engaged to sit up at the villa that night along with Francisco , were bribed to second the views of this gang of thieves .
It was agreed that about midnight the robbers should be let into the house ; that Francisco should be tied hand and foot , whilst they carried off their booty .
`` He is a stubborn chap , though so young , I understand , '' said the captain of the robbers to his men ; `` but we carry poniards , and know how to use them .
Piedro , you look pale .
You don't require to be reminded of what I said to you when we were alone just now ? ''
Piedro 's voice failed , and some of his comrades observed that he was young and new to the business .
The captain , who , from being his pretended friend during his wealthy days , had of late become his tyrant , cast a stern look at Piedro , and bid him be sure to be at the old Jew 's , which was the place of meeting , in the dusk of the evening .
After saying this he departed .
Piedro , when he was alone , tried to collect his thoughts -- all his thoughts were full of horror .
`` Where am I ? ''
said he to himself ; `` what am I about ?
Did I understand rightly what he said about poniards ?
Francisco ; oh , Francisco !
Excellent , kind , generous Francisco !
Yes , I recollect your look when you held the bunch of grapes to my lips , as I sat by the sea-shore deserted by all the world ; and now , what friends have I. Robbers and -- '' The word MURDERERS he could not utter .
He again recollected what had been said about poniards , and the longer his mind fixed upon the words , and the look that accompanied them , the more he was shocked .
He could not doubt but that it was the serious intention of his accomplices to murder Francisco , if he should make any resistance .
Piedro had at this moment no friend in the world to whom he could apply for advice or assistance .
His wretched father died some weeks before this time , in a fit of intoxication .
Piedro walked up and down the street , scarcely capable of thinking , much less of coming to any rational resolution .
The hours passed away , the shadows of the houses lengthened under his footsteps , the evening came on , and when it grew dusk , after hesitating in great agony of mind for some time , his fear of the robbers ' vengeance prevailed over every other feeling , and he went at the appointed hour to the place of meeting .
The place of meeting was at the house of that Jew to whom he , several months before , sold the diamond cross .
That cross which he thought himself so lucky to have stolen , and to have disposed of undetected , was , in fact , the cause of his being in his present dreadful situation .
It was at the Jew 's that he connected himself with this gang of robbers , to whom he was now become an absolute slave .
`` Oh , that I dared to disobey ! ''
said he to himself , with a deep sigh , as he knocked softly at the back door of the Jew 's house .
The back door opened into a narrow , unfrequented street , and some small rooms at this side of the house were set apart for the reception of guests who desired to have their business kept secret .
These rooms were separated by a dark passage from the rest of the house , and numbers of people came to the shop in the front of the house , which looked into a creditable street , without knowing anything more , from the ostensible appearance of the shop , than that it was a kind of pawnbroker 's , where old clothes , old iron , and all sorts of refuse goods , might be disposed of conveniently .
At the moment Piedro knocked at the back door , the front shop was full of customers ; and the Jew 's boy , whose office it was to attend to these signals , let Piedro in , told him that none of his comrades were yet come , and left him in a room by himself .
He was pale and trembling , and felt a cold dew spread over him .
He had a leaden image of Saint Januarius tied round his neck , which , in the midst of his wickedness , he superstitiously preserved as a sort of charm , and on this he kept his eyes stupidly fixed , as he sat alone in this gloomy place .
He listened from time to time , but he heard no noise at the side of the house where he was .
His accomplices did not arrive , and , in a sort of impatient terror , the attendant upon an evil conscience , he flung open the door of his cell , and groped his way through the passage which he knew led to the public shop .
He longed to hear some noise , and to mix with the living .
The Jew , when Piedro entered the shop , was bargaining with a poor , thin-looking man about some gunpowder .
`` I do n't deny that it has been wet , '' said the man , `` but since it was in the bucket of water , it has been carefully dried .
I tell you the simple truth , that so soon after the grand eruption of Mount Vesuvius , the people of Naples will not relish fireworks .
My poor little rockets , and even my Catherine-wheels , will have no effect .
I am glad to part with all I have in this line of business .
A few days ago I had fine things in readiness for the Countess de Flora 's birthday , which was to have been celebrated at the count 's villa . ''
`` Why do you fix your eyes on me , friend ?
What is your discourse to me ? ''
said Piedro , who imagined that the man fixed his eyes upon him as he mentioned the name of the count 's villa .
`` I did not know that I fixed my eyes upon you ; I was thinking of my fireworks , '' said the poor man , simply .
`` But now that I do look at you and hear your voice , I recollect having had the pleasure of seeing you before . ''
`` When ?
where ? ''
said Piedro .
`` A great while ago ; no wonder you have forgotten me , '' said the man ; `` but I can recall the night to your recollection .
You were in the street with me the night I let off that unlucky rocket , which frightened the horses , and was the cause of overturning a lady 's coach .
Do n't you remember the circumstance ? ''
`` I have a confused recollection of some such thing , '' said Piedro , in great embarrassment ; and he looked suspiciously at this man , in doubt whether he was cunning , and wanted to sound him , or whether he was so simple as he appeared .
`` You did not , perhaps , hear , then , '' continued the man , `` that there was a great search made , after the overturn , for a fine diamond cross , belonging to the lady in the carriage ?
That lady , though I did not know it till lately , was the Countess de Flora . ''
`` I know nothing of the matter , '' interrupted Piedro , in great agitation .
His confusion was so marked , that the firework-maker could not avoid taking notice of it ; and a silence of some moments ensued .
The Jew , more practised in dissimulation than Piedro , endeavoured to turn the man's attention back to his rockets and his gunpowder -- agreed to take the gunpowder -- paid for it in haste , and was , though apparently unconcerned , eager to get rid of him .
But this was not so easily done .
The man's curiosity was excited , and his suspicions of Piedro were increased every moment by all the dark changes of his countenance .
Piedro , overpowered with the sense of guilt , surprised at the unexpected mention of the diamond cross , and of the Count de Flora 's villa , stood like one convicted , and seemed fixed to the spot , without power of motion .
`` I want to look at the old cambric that you said you had -- that would do for making -- that you could let me have cheap for artificial flowers , '' said the firework-maker to the Jew ; and as he spoke , his eye from time to time looked towards Piedro .
Piedro felt for the leaden image of the saint , which he wore round his neck .
The string which held it cracked , and broke with the pull he gave it .
This slight circumstance affected his terrified and superstitious mind more than all the rest .
He imagined that at this moment his fate was decided ; that Saint Januarius deserted him , and that he was undone .
He precipitately followed the firework-man the instant he left the shop , and seizing hold of his arm , whispered , `` I must speak to you . ''
`` Speak , then , '' said the man , astonished .
`` Not here ; this way , '' said he , drawing him towards the dark passage : '' what I have to say must not be overheard .
You are going to the Count de Flora 's , are not you ? ''
`` I am , '' said the man .
He was going there to speak to the countess about some artificial flowers ; but Piedro thought he was going to speak to her about the diamond cross .
`` You are going to give information against me ?
Nay , hear me , I confess that I purloined that diamond cross ; but I can do the count a great service , upon condition that he pardons me .
His villa is to be attacked this night by four well armed men .
They will set out five hours hence .
I am compelled , under the threat of assassination , to accompany them ; but I shall do no more .
I throw myself upon the count 's mercy .
Hasten to him -- we have no time to lose . ''
The poor man , who heard this confession , escaped from Piedro the moment he loosed his arm .
With all possible expedition he ran to the count's palace in Naples , and related to him all that had been said by Piedro .
Some of the count 's servants , on whom he could most depend , were at a distant part of the city attending their mistress , but the English gentleman offered the services of his man Arthur .
Arthur no sooner heard the business , and understood that Francisco was in danger , than he armed himself without saying one word , saddled his English horse , and was ready to depart before anyone else had finished their exclamations and conjectures .
`` But we are not to set out yet , '' said the servant ; `` it is but four miles to Torre del Greco ; the sbirri ( officers of justice ) are summoned -- they are to go with us -- we must wait for them . ''
They waited , much against Arthur 's inclination , a considerable time for these sbirri .
At length they set out , and just as they reached the villa , the flash of the pistol was seen from one of the apartments in the house .
The robbers were there .
This pistol was snapped by their captain at poor Francisco , who had bravely asserted that he would , as long as he had life , defend the property committed to his care .
The pistol missed fire , for it was charged with some of the damaged powder which the Jew had bought that evening from the firework maker , and which he had sold as excellent immediately afterwards to his favourite customers -- the robbers who met at his house .
Arthur , as soon as he perceived the flash of the piece , pressed forward through all the apartments , followed by the count 's servants and the officers of justice .
At the sudden appearance of so many armed men , the robbers stood dismayed .
Arthur eagerly shook Francisco 's hand , congratulating him upon his safety , and did not perceive , till he had given him several rough friendly shakes , that his arm was wounded , and that he was pale with the loss of blood .
`` It is not much -- only a slight wound , '' said Francisco ; `` one that I should have escaped , if I had been upon my guard ; but the sight of a face that I little expected to see in such company took from me all presence of mind ; and one of the ruffians stabbed me here in the arm , whilst I stood in stupid astonishment . ''
`` Oh !
take me to prison !
take me to prison -- I am weary of life -- I am a wretch not fit to live ! ''
cried Piedro , holding his hands to be tied by the sbirri .
The next morning Piedro was conveyed to prison ; and as he passed through the streets of Naples he was met by several of those who had known him when he was a child .
`` Ay , '' said they , as he went by , `` his father encouraged him in cheating when he was BUT A CHILD ; and see what he is come to , now he is a man ! ''
He was ordered to remain twelve months in solitary confinement .
His captain and his accomplices were sent to the galleys , and the Jew was banished from Naples .
And now , having got these villains out of the way , let us return to honest Francisco .
His wound was soon healed .
Arthur was no bad surgeon , for he let his patient get well as fast as he pleased ; and Carlo and Rosetta nursed him with so much kindness , that he was almost sorry to find himself perfectly recovered .
`` Now that you are able to go out , '' said Francisco 's father to him , `` you must come and look at my new house , my dear son . ''
`` Your new house , father ? ''
`` Yes , son , and a charming one it is , and a handsome piece of land near it -- all at a safe distance , too , from Mount Vesuvius ; and can you guess how I came by it ? -- it was given to me for having a good son . ''
`` Yes , '' cried Carlo ; `` the inhabitants of Resina , and several who had property near Terre del Greco , and whose houses and lives were saved by your intrepidity in carrying the materials for the fireworks and the gunpowder out of this dangerous place , went in a body to the duke , and requested that he would mention your name and these facts to the king , who , amongst the grants he has made to the sufferers by the late eruption of Mount Vesuvius , has been pleased to say that he gives this house and garden to your father , because you have saved the property and lives of many of his subjects . ''
The value of a handsome portion of furniture , plate , etc. , in the Count de Flora 's villa , was , according to the count 's promise , given to him ; and this money he divided between his own family and that of the good carpenter who first put a pencil into his hands .
Arthur would not accept of any present from him .
To Mr .
Lee , the English gentleman , he offered one of his own drawings -- a fruit-piece .
`` I like this very well , '' said Arthur , as he examined the drawing , `` but I should like this melon better if it was a little bruised .
It is now three years ago since I was going to buy that bruised melon from you ; you showed me your honest nature then , though you were but a boy ; and I have found you the same ever since .
A good beginning makes a good ending -- an honest boy will make an honest man ; and honesty is the best policy , as you have proved to all who wanted the proof , I hope . ''
`` Yes , '' added Francisco 's father , `` I think it is pretty plain that Piedro the Cunning has not managed quite so well as Francisco the Honest . ''
TARLTON .
Delightful task !
to rear the tender thought , -- To teach the young idea how to shoot , -- To pour the fresh instruction o'er the mind , -- To breathe th ' enlivening spirit , -- and to fix The generous purpose in the glowing breast .
THOMSON .
Young Hardy was educated by Mr .
Freeman , a very excellent master , at one of our rural Sunday schools .
He was honest , obedient , active and good- natured , hence he was esteemed by his master ; and being beloved by all his companions who were good , he did not desire to be loved by the bad ; nor was he at all vexed or ashamed when idle , mischievous or dishonest boys attempted to plague or ridicule him .
His friend Loveit , on the contrary , wished to be universally liked , and his highest ambition was to be thought the best natured boy in the school -- and so he was .
He usually went by the name of POOR LOVEIT , and everybody pitied him when he got into disgrace , which he frequently did , for though he had a good disposition , he was led to do things which he knew to be wrong merely because he could never have the courage to say `` NO , '' because he was afraid to offend the ill-natured , and could not bear to be laughed at by fools .
One fine autumn evening , all the boys were permitted to go out to play in a pleasant green meadow near the school .
Loveit and another boy , called Tarlton , began to play a game of battledore and shuttlecock , and a large party stood by to look on , for they were the best players at battledore and shuttlecock in the school , and this was a trial of skill between them .
When they had got it up to three hundred and twenty , the game became very interesting .
The arms of the combatants tired that they could scarcely wield the battledores .
The shuttlecock began to waver in the air ; now it almost touched the ground , and now , to the astonishment of the spectators , mounted again high over their heads : yet the strokes became feebler and feebler ; and `` Now , Loveit ! ''
`` Now , Tarlton ! ''
resounded on all sides .
For another minute the victory was doubtful ; but at length the setting sun , shining full in Loveit 's face , so dazzled his eyes that he could no longer see the shuttlecock , and it fell at his feet .
After the first shout for Tarlton 's triumph was over , everybody exclaimed , `` Poor Loveit !
he 's the best natured fellow in the world !
What a pity that he did not stand with his back to the sun ! ''
`` Now , I dare you all to play another game with me , '' cried Tarlton , vauntingly ; and as he spoke , he tossed the shuttlecock up with all his force -- with so much force that it went over the hedge and dropped into a lane , which went close beside the field .
`` Hey-day ! ''
said Tarlton , `` what shall we do now ? ''
The boys were strictly forbidden to go into the lane ; and it was upon their promise not to break this command , that they were allowed to play in the adjoining field .
No other shuttlecock was to be had and their play was stopped .
They stood on the top of the bank , peeping over the hedge .
`` I see it yonder , '' said Tarlton ; `` I wish somebody would get it .
One could get over the gate at the bottom of the field , and be back again in half a minute , '' added he , looking at Loveit .
`` But you know we must not go into the lane , '' said Loveit , hesitatingly .
`` Pugh ! ''
said Tarlton , `` why , now , what harm could it do ? ''
`` I do n't know , '' said Loveit , drumming upon his battledore ; `` but -- '' '' You do n't know , man !
why , then , what are you afraid of , I ask you ? ''
Loveit coloured , went on drumming , and again , in a lower voice , said `` HE DID N'T KNOW . ''
But upon Tarlton 's repeating , in a more insolent tone , `` I ask you , man , what you 're afraid of ? ''
he suddenly left off drumming , and looking round , said , `` he was not afraid of anything that he knew of . ''
`` Yes , but you are , '' said Hardy , coming forward .
`` Am I ? ''
said Loveit ; `` of what , pray , am I afraid ? ''
`` Of doing wrong ! ''
`` Afraid OF DOING WRONG ! ''
repeated Tarlton , mimicking him , so that he made everybody laugh .
`` Now , had n't you better say afraid of being flogged ? ''
`` No , '' said Hardy , coolly , after the laugh had somewhat subsided , `` I am as little afraid of being flogged as you are , Tarlton ; but I meant -- '' '' No matter what you meant ; why should you interfere with your wisdom and your meanings ; nobody thought of asking YOU to stir a step for us ; but we asked Loveit , because he 's the best fellow in the world . ''
`` And for that very reason you should not ask him , because , you know he ca n't refuse you anything . ''
`` Indeed , though , '' cried Loveit , piqued , `` THERE you 're mistaken , for I could refuse if I chose it . ''
Hardy smiled ; and Loveit , half afraid of his contempt , and half afraid of Tarlton 's ridicule , stood doubtful , and again had recourse to his battledore , which he balanced most curiously upon his forefinger .
`` Look at him ! -- now do look at him ! ''
cried Tarlton ; `` did you ever in your life see anybody look so silly ? -- Hardy has him quite under his thumb ; he 's so mortally afraid of Parson Prig , that he dare not , for the soul of him , turn either of his eyes from the tip of his nose ; look how he squints ! ''
`` I do n't squint , '' said Loveit , looking up , `` and nobody has me under his thumb !
and what Hardy said was only for fear I should get in disgrace ; he 's the best friend I have . ''
Loveit spoke this with more than usual spirit , for both his heart and his pride were touched .
`` Come along , then , '' said Hardy , taking him by the arm in an affectionate manner ; and he was just going , when Tarlton called after him , `` Ay , go along with its best friend , and take care it does not get into a scrape ; - -good-bye , Little Panado ! ''
`` Whom do they call Little Panado ? ''
said Loveit , turning his head hastily back .
`` Never mind , '' said Hardy , `` what does it signify ? ''
`` No , '' said Loveit , `` to be sure it does not signify ; but one does not like to be called Little Panado : besides , '' added he , after going a few steps farther , `` they 'll all think it so ill-natured .
I had better go back , and just tell them that I 'm very sorry I ca n't get their shuttlecock ; do come back with me . ''
`` No , '' said Hardy , `` I ca n't go back ; and you 'd better not . ''
`` But , I assure you , I wo n't stay a minute ; wait for me , '' added Loveit ; and he slunk back again to prove that he was not Little Panado .
Once returned , the rest followed , of course ; for to support his character of good-nature he was obliged to yield to the entreaties of his companions , and to show his spirit , leapt over the gate , amidst the acclamations of the little mob : -- he was quickly out of sight .
`` Here , '' cried he , returning in about five minutes , quite out of breath , '' I 've got the shuttlecock ; and I 'll tell you what I 've seen , '' cried he , panting for breath .
`` What ? ''
cried everybody , eagerly .
`` Why , just at the turn of the corner , at the end of the lane '' -- panting .
`` Well , '' said Tarlton , impatiently , `` do go on . ''
`` Let me just take breath first . ''
`` Pugh -- never mind your breath . ''
`` Well , then , just at the turn of the corner , at the end of the lane , as I was looking about for the shuttlecock , I heard a great rustling somewhere near me , and so I looked where it could come from ; and I saw , in a nice little garden , on the opposite side of the way , a boy , about as big as Tarlton , sitting in a great tree , shaking the branches : so I called to the boy , to beg one ; but he said he could not give me one , for that they were his grandfather 's ; and just at that minute , from behind a gooseberry bush , up popped the uncle ; the grandfather poked his head out of the window ; so I ran off as fast as my legs would carry me though I heard him bawling after me all the way . ''
`` And let him bawl , '' cried Tarlton ; `` he sha n't bawl for nothing ; I'm determined we 'll have some of his fine large rosy apples before I sleep to-night . ''
At this speech a general silence ensued ; everybody kept their eyes fixed upon Tarlton , except Loveit , who looked down , apprehensive that he should be drawn on much farther than he intended .
`` Oh , indeed ! ''
said he to himself , `` as Hardy told me , I had better not have come back ! ''
Regardless of this confusion , Tarlton continued , `` But before I say any more , I hope we have no spies amongst us .
If there is any one of you afraid to be flogged , let him march off this instant ! ''
Loveit coloured , bit his lips , wished to go , but had not the courage to move first .
He waited to see what everybody else would do : nobody stirred ; so Loveit stood still .
`` Well , then , '' cried Tarlton , giving his hand to the boy next him , then to the next , `` your word and honour that you wo n't betray me ; but stand by me , and I 'll stand by you . ''
Each boy gave his hand and his promise ; repeating , `` Stand by me , and I 'll stand by you . ''
Loveit hung back till the last ; and had almost twisted off the button of the boy 's coat who screened him , when Tarlton came up , holding out his hand , `` Come , Loveit , lad , you 're in for it : stand by me , and I 'll stand by you . ''
`` Indeed , Tarlton , '' expostulated he , without looking him in the face , `` I do wish you 'd give up this scheme ; I daresay all the apples are gone by this time ; I wish you would .
Do , pray , give up this scheme . ''
`` What scheme , man ?
you have'n't heard it yet ; you may as well know your text before you begin preaching . ''
The corners of Loveit 's mouth could not refuse to smile , though in his heart he felt not the slightest inclination to laugh .
`` Why , I do n't know you , I declare I do n't know you to-day , '' said Tarlton ; '' you used to be the best natured most agreeable lad in the world , and would do anything one asked you ; but you 're quite altered of late , as we were saying just now , when you skulked away with Hardy : come , -- do , man , pluck up a little spirit , and be one of us , or you 'll make us all HATE YOU . ''
`` HATE me ! ''
repeated Loveit , with terror ; `` no , surely , you wo n't all HATE me ! ''
and he mechanically stretched out his hand which Tarlton shook violently , saying , `` Ay , now , that 's right . ''
`` Ay , now , that 's wrong ! ''
whispered Loveit 's conscience ; but his conscience was of no use to him , for it was always overpowered by the voice of numbers ; and though he had the wish , he never had the power , to do right .
`` Poor Loveit !
I knew he would not refuse us , '' cried his companions ; and even Tarlton , the moment he shook hands with him , despised him .
It is certain that weakness of mind is despised both by the good and the bad .
The league being thus formed , Tarlton assumed all the airs of commander , explained his schemes , and laid the plan of attack upon the poor old man 's apple-tree .
It was the only one he had the world .
We shall not dwell upon their consultation ; for the amusement of contriving such expeditions is often the chief thing which induces idle boys to engage in them .
There was a small window at the end of the back staircase , through which , between nine and ten o'clock at night , Tarlton , accompanied by Loveit and another boy , crept out .
It was a moonlight night , and after crossing the field , and climbing the gate , directed by Loveit , who now resolved to go through the affair with spirit , they proceeded down the lane with rash yet fearful steps .
At a distance Loveit saw the white washed cottage , and the apple-tree beside it .
They quickened their pace , and with some difficulty scrambled through the hedge which fenced the garden , though not without being scratched and torn by the briers .
Everything was silent .
Yet now and then , at every rustling of the leaves , they started , and their hearts beat violently .
Once , as Loveit was climbing the apple-tree , he thought he heard a door in the cottage open , and earnestly begged his companions to desist and return home .
This , however , he could by no means persuade them to do , until they had filled their pockets with apples ; then , to his great joy , they returned , crept in at the window and each retired , as softly as possible , to his own apartment .
Loveit slept in the room with Hardy , whom he had left fast asleep , and whom he now was extremely afraid of awakening .
All the apples were emptied out of Loveit 's pockets , and lodged with Tarlton till the morning , for fear the smell should betray the secret to Hardy .
The room door was apt to creak , but it was opened with such precaution , that no noise could be heard , and Loveit found his friend as fast asleep as when he left him .
`` Ah , '' said he to himself , `` how quietly he sleeps !
I wish I had been sleeping too . ''
The reproaches of Loveit 's conscience , however , served no other purpose but to torment him ; he had not sufficient strength of mind to be good .
The very next night , in spite of all his fears , and all his penitence , and all his resolutions , by a little fresh ridicule and persuasion he was induced to accompany the same party on a similar expedition .
We must observe , that the necessity for continuing their depredations became stronger the third day ; for , though at first only a small party had been in the secret , by degrees it was divulged to the whole school ; and it was necessary to secure secrecy by sharing the booty .
Everyone was astonished that Hardy , with all his quickness and penetration , had not yet discovered their proceedings ; but Loveit could not help suspecting that he was not quite so ignorant as he appeared to be .
Loveit had strictly kept his promise of secrecy ; but he was by no means an artful boy ; and in talking to his friend , conscious that he had something to conceal , he was perpetually on the point of betraying himself ; then recollecting his engagement , he blushed , stammered , bungled ; and upon Hardy 's asking what he meant , would answer with a silly , guilty countenance , that he did not know ; or abruptly break off , saying , `` Oh nothing !
nothing at all ! ''
It was in vain that he urged Tarlton to permit him to consult his friend .
A gloom overspread Tarlton 's brow when he began to speak on the subject , and he always returned a peremptory refusal , accompanied with some such taunting expression as this -- '' I wish we had nothing to do with such a sneaking fellow ; he 'll betray us all , I see , before we have done with him . ''
`` Well , '' said Loveit to himself , `` so I am abused after all , and called a sneaking fellow for my pains ; that 's rather hard , to be sure , when I've got so little by the job . ''
In truth he had not got much ; for in the division of the booty only one apple , and half of another , which was only half ripe , happened to fall to his share ; though , to be sure , when they had all eaten their apples , he had the satisfaction to hear everybody declare they were very sorry they had forgotten to offer some of theirs to `` POOR LOVEIT . ''
In the meantime , the visits to the apple-tree had been now too frequently repeated to remain concealed from the old man who lived in the cottage .
He used to examine his only tree very frequently , and missing numbers of rosy apples , which he had watched ripening , he , though not prone to suspicion , began to think that there was something going wrong ; especially as a gap was made in his hedge , and there were several small footsteps in his flower beds .
The good old man was not at all inclined to give pain to any living creature , much less to children , of whom he was particularly fond .
Nor was he in the least avaricious , for though he was not rich , he had enough to live upon , because he had been very industrious in his youth ; and he was always very ready to part with the little he had .
Nor was he a cross old man .
If anything would have made him angry , it would have been the seeing his favourite tree robbed , as he had promised himself the pleasure of giving his red apples to his grandchildren on his birthday .
However , he looked up at the tree in sorrow rather than in anger , and leaning upon his staff , he began to consider what he had best do .
`` If I complain to their master , '' said he to himself , `` they will certainly be flogged , and that I should be sorry for : yet they must not be let to go on stealing ; that would be worse still , for it would surely bring them to the gallows in the end .
Let me see -- oh , ay , that will do ; I will borrow farmer Kent 's dog Barker , he 'll keep them off , I 'll answer for it . ''
Farmer Kent lent his dog Barker , cautioning his neighbour , at the same time , to be sure to chain him well , for he was the fiercest mastiff in England .
The old man , with farmer Kent 's assistance , chained him fast to the trunk of the apple-tree .
Night came ; and Tarlton , Loveit and his companions , returned at the usual hour .
Grown bolder now by frequent success , they came on talking and laughing .
But the moment they had set their foot in the garden , the dog started up ; and , shaking the chain as he sprang forward , barked with unremitting fury .
They stood still as if fixed to the spot .
There was just moonlight enough to see the dog .
`` Let us try the other side of the tree , '' said Tarlton .
But to whichever side they turned , the dog flew round in an instant , barking with increased fury .
`` He 'll break his chain and tear us to pieces , '' cried Tarlton ; and , struck with terror , he immediately threw down the basket he had brought with him , and betook himself to flight , with the greatest precipitation .
`` Help me !
oh , pray , help me !
I ca n't get through the hedge , '' cried Loveit , in a lamentable tone , whilst the dog growled hideously , and sprang forward to the extremity of his chain .
`` I ca n't get out !
Oh , for God 's sake , stay for me one minute , dear Tarlton ! ''
He called in vain ; he was left to struggle through his difficulties by himself ; and of all his dear friends not one turned back to help him .
At last , torn and terrified , he got through the hedge and ran home , despising his companions for their selfishness .
Nor could he help observing that Tarlton , with all his vaunted prowess , was the first to run away from the appearance of danger .
The next morning Loveit could not help reproaching the party with their conduct .
`` Why could not you , any of you , stay one minute to help me ? ''
said he .
`` We did not hear you call , '' answered one .
`` I was so frightened , '' said another , `` I would not have turned back for the whole world . ''
`` And you , Tarlton ? ''
`` I , '' said Tarlton ; `` had not I enough to do to take care of myself , you blockhead ?
Everyone for himself in this world ! ''
`` So I see , '' said Loveit , gravely .
`` Well , man !
is there anything strange in that ? ''
`` Strange !
why , yes ; I thought you all loved me ! ''
`` Lord love you , lad !
so we do ; but we love ourselves better . ''
`` Hardy would not have served me so , however , '' said Loveit , turning away in disgust .
Tarlton was alarmed .
`` Pugh ! ''
said he ; `` what nonsense have you taken into your brain !
Think no more about it .
We are all very sorry , and beg your pardon ; come , shake hands , forgive and forget . ''
Loveit gave his hand , but gave it rather coldly .
`` I forgive it with all my heart , '' said he ; `` but I can not forget it so soon ! ''
`` Why , then , you are not such a good humoured fellow as we thought you were .
Surely you can not bear malice , Loveit . ''
Loveit smiled , and allowed that he certainly could not bear malice .
`` Well , then , come ; you know at the bottom we all love you , and would do anything in the world for you . ''
Poor Loveit , flattered in his foible , began to believe that they did love him at the bottom , as they said , and even with his eyes open consented again to be duped .
`` How strange it is , '' thought he , `` that I should set such value upon the love of those I despise !
When I 'm once out of this scrape , I 'll have no more to do with them , I 'm determined . ''
Compared with his friend Hardy , his new associates did indeed appear contemptible ; for all this time Hardy had treated him with uniform kindness , avoided to pry into his secrets , yet seemed ready to receive his confidence , if it had been offered .
After school in the evening , as he was standing silently beside Hardy , who was ruling a sheet of paper for him , Tarlton , in his brutal manner , came up , and seizing him by the arm , cried , `` Come along with me , Loveit , I 've something to say to you . ''
`` I ca n't come now , '' said Loveit , drawing away his arm .
`` Ah , do come now , '' said Tarlton , in a voice of persuasion .
`` Well , I 'll come presently . ''
`` Nay , but do , pray ; there 's a good fellow , come now , because I have something to say to you . ''
`` What is it you 've got to say to me ?
I wish you 'd let me alone , '' said Loveit ; yet at the same time he suffered himself to he led away .
Tarlton took particular pains to humour him and bring him into temper again ; and even though he was not very apt to part with his playthings , went so far as to say , `` Loveit , the other day you wanted a top ; I 'll give you mine if you desire it . ''
Loveit thanked him , and was overjoyed at the thought of possessing this top .
`` But what did you want to say to me just now ? ''
`` Ay , we 'll talk of that presently ; not yet -- when we get out of hearing . ''
`` Nobody is near us , '' said Loveit .
`` Come a little farther however , '' said Tarlton , looking round suspiciously .
`` Well now , well ? ''
`` You know the dog that frightened us last night ? ''
`` Yes . ''
`` It will never frighten us again . ''
`` Wo n't it ?
how so ? ''
`` Look here , '' said Tarlton , drawing something from his pocket wrapped in a blue handkerchief .
`` What 's that ? ''
Tarlton opened it .
`` Raw meat ! ''
exclaimed Loveit .
`` How came you by it ? ''
`` Tom , the servant boy , Tom got it for me ; and I 'm to give him sixpence . ''
`` And is it for the dog ? ''
`` Yes ; I vowed I 'd be revenged on him , and after this he 'll never bark again . ''
`` Never bark again !
What do you mean ?
Is it poison ? ''
exclaimed Loveit , starting back with horror .
`` Only poison for A DOG , '' said Tarlton , confused ; `` you could not look more shocking if it was poison for a Christian . ''
Loveit stood for nearly a minute in profound silence .
`` Tarlton , '' said he at last , in a changed tone and altered manner , `` I did not know you ; I will have no more to do with you . ''
`` Nay , but stay , '' said Tarlton , catching hold of his arm , `` stay ; I was only joking . ''
`` Let go my arm -- you were in earnest . ''
`` But then that was before I knew there was any harm .
If you think there 's any harm ? ''
`` IF , '' said Loveit .
`` Why , you know , I might not know ; for Tom told me it 's a thing that's often done .
Ask Tom . ''
`` I 'll ask nobody !
Surely we know better what 's right and wrong than Tom does . ''
`` But only just ask him , to hear what he 'll say . ''
`` I do n't want to hear what he 'll say , '' cried Loveit , vehemently : `` the dog will die in agonies -- in agonies !
There was a dog poisoned at my father 's -- I saw him in the yard .
Poor creature !
He lay and howled and writhed himself ! ''
`` Poor creature !
Well , there 's no harm done now , '' cried Tarlton , in a hypocritical tone .
But though he thought fit to dissemble with Loveit , he was thoroughly determined in his purpose .
Poor Loveit , in haste to get away , returned to his friend Hardy ; but his mind was in such agitation , that he neither talked nor moved like himself ; and two or three times his heart was so full that he was ready to burst into tears .
`` How good-natured you are to me , '' said he to Hardy , as he was trying vainly to entertain him ; `` but if you knew -- '' Here he stopped short , for the bell for evening prayer rang , and they all took their places , and knelt down .
After prayers , as they were going to bed , Loveit stopped Tarlton , -- '' WELL ! ''
asked he , in an inquiring manner , fixing his eyes upon him .
`` WELL ! ''
replied Tarlton , in an audacious tone , as if he meant to set his inquiring eye at defiance .
`` What do you mean to do to-night ? ''
`` To go to sleep , as you do , I suppose , '' replied Tarlton , turning away abruptly , and whistling as he walked off .
`` Oh , he has certainly changed his mind ! ''
said Loveit to himself , `` else he could not whistle . ''
About ten minutes after this , as he and Hardy were undressing , Hardy suddenly recollected that he had left his new kite out upon the grass .
`` Oh , '' said he , `` it will be quite spoiled before morning ! ''
`` Call Tom , '' said Loveit , `` and bid him bring it in for you in a minute . ''
They both went to the top of the stairs to call Tom ; no one answered .
They called again louder , `` Is Tom below ? ''
`` I 'm here , '' answered he at last , coming out of Tarlton 's room with a look of mixed embarrassment and effrontery .
And as he was receiving Hardy's commission , Loveit saw the corner of the blue handkerchief hanging out of his pocket .
This excited fresh suspicions in Loveit 's mind ; but , without saying one word , he immediately stationed himself at the window in his room , which looked out towards the lane ; and , as the moon was risen , he could see if anyone passed that way .
`` What are you doing there ? ''
said Hardy , after he had been watching some time ; `` why do n't you come to bed ? ''
Loveit returned no answer , but continued standing at the window .
Nor did he watch long in vain .
Presently he saw Tom gliding slowly along a by-path , and get over the gate into the lane .
`` He 's gone to do it ! ''
exclaimed Loveit aloud , with an emotion which he could not command .
`` Who 's gone ?
to do what ? ''
cried Hardy , starting up .
`` How cruel !
how wicked ! ''
continued Loveit .
`` What 's cruel -- what 's wicked ?
speak out at once ! ''
returned Hardy , in that commanding tone which , in moments of danger , strong minds feel themselves entitled to assume towards weak ones .
Loveit instantly , though in an incoherent manner , explained the affair to him .
Scarcely had the words passed his lips , when Hardy sprang up , and began dressing himself without saying one syllable .
`` For God 's sake , what are you going to do ? ''
said Loveit , in great anxiety .
`` They 'll never forgive me !
do n't betray me !
they 'll never forgive !
pray , speak to me !
only say you wo n't betray us . ''
`` I will not betray you , trust to me , '' said Hardy : and he left the room , and Loveit stood in amazement ; while , in the meantime , Hardy , in hopes of overtaking Tom before the fate of the poor dog was decided , ran with all possible speed across the meadow , then down the lane .
He came up with Tom just as he was climbing the bank into the old man 's garden .
Hardy , too much out of breath to speak , seized hold of him , dragged him down , detaining him with a firm grasp , whilst he panted for utterance .
`` What , Master Hardy , is it you ?
what 's the matter ?
what do you want ? ''
`` I want the poisoned meat that you have in your pocket . ''
`` Who told you that I had any such thing ? ''
said Tom , clapping his hand upon his guilty pocket .
`` Give it me quietly , and I 'll let you off . ''
`` Sir , upon my word I have n't !
I did n't !
I do n't know what you mean , '' said Tom , trembling , though he was by far the stronger of the two .
`` Indeed , I do n't know what you mean . ''
`` You do , '' said Hardy , with great indignation : and a violent struggle immediately commenced .
The dog , now alarmed by the voices , began to bark outrageously .
Tom was terrified lest the old man should come out to see what was the matter ; his strength forsook him , and flinging the handkerchief and meat over the hedge , he ran away with all his speed .
The handkerchief fell within reach of the dog , who instantly snapped at it ; luckily it did not come untied .
Hardy saw a pitchfork on a dunghill close beside him , and , seizing upon it , stuck it into the handkerchief .
The dog pulled , tore , growled , grappled , yelled ; it was impossible to get the handkerchief from between his teeth ; but the knot was loosed , the meat , unperceived by the dog , dropped out , and while he dragged off the handkerchief in triumph , Hardy , with inexpressible joy , plunged the pitchfork into the poisoned meat , and bore it away .
Never did hero retire with more satisfaction from a field of battle .
Full of the pleasure of successful benevolence , Hardy tripped joyfully home , and vaulted over the window sill , when the first object he beheld was Mr .
Power , the usher , standing at the head of the stairs , with his candle in his hand .
`` Come up , whoever you are , '' said Mr .
William Power , in a stern voice .
`` I thought I should find you out at last .
Come up , whoever you are ! ''
Hardy obeyed without reply. -- '' Hardy ! ''
exclaimed Mr .
Power , starting back with astonishment ; `` is it you , Mr .
Hardy ? ''
repeated he , holding the light to his face .
`` Why , sir , '' said he , in a sneering tone , `` I 'm sure if Mr .
Trueman was here he would n't believe his own eyes ; but for my part I saw through you long since ; I never liked saints , for my share .
Will you please to do me the favour , sir , if it is not too much trouble , to empty your pockets . ''
Hardy obeyed in silence .
`` Heyday !
meat !
raw meat !
what next ? ''
`` That 's all , '' said Hardy , emptying his pockets inside out .
`` This is ALL , '' said Mr .
Power , taking up the meat .
`` Pray , sir , '' said Hardy , eagerly , `` let that meat be burned , it is poisoned . ''
`` Poisoned ! ''
cried Mr .
William Power , letting it drop out of his fingers ; '' you wretch ! ''
looking at him with a menacing air : `` what is all this ?
Speak . ''
Hardy was silent .
`` Why do n't you speak ? ''
cried he , shaking him by the shoulder impatiently .
Still Hardy was silent .
`` Down upon your knees this minute and confess all : tell me where you 've been , what you 've been doing , and who are your accomplices , for I know there is a gang of you ; so , '' added he , pressing heavily upon Hardy 's shoulder , `` down upon your knees this minute , and confess the whole , that 's your only way now to get off yourself .
If you hope for MY pardon , I can tell you it's not to be had without asking for . ''
`` Sir , '' said Hardy , in a firm but respectful voice , `` I have no pardon to ask , I have nothing to confess ; I am innocent ; but if I were not , I would never try to get off myself by betraying my companions . ''
`` Very well , sir !
very well !
very fine !
stick to it , stick to it , I advise you , and we shall see .
And how will you look to-morrow , Mr .
Innocent , when my uncle , the doctor , comes home ? ''
`` As I do now , sir , '' said Hardy , unmoved .
His composure threw Mr .
Power into a rage too great for utterance .
`` Sir , '' continued Hardy , `` ever since I have been at school , I never told a lie , and therefore , sir , I hope you will believe me now .
Upon my word and honour , sir , I have done nothing wrong . ''
`` Nothing wrong ?
Better and better !
what , when I caught you going out at night ? ''
`` THAT , to be sure , was wrong , '' said Hardy , recollecting himself ; `` but except that -- '' '' Except that , sir !
I will except nothing .
Come along with me , young gentleman , your time for pardon is past . ''
Saying these words , he pulled Hardy along a narrow passage to a small closet , set apart for desperate offenders , and usually known by the name of the BLACK HOLE .
`` There , sir , take up your lodging there for to- night , '' said he , pushing him in ; `` tomorrow I 'll know more , or I 'll know why , '' added he , double locking the door , with a tremendous noise , upon his prisoner , and locking also the door at the end of the passage , so that no one could have access to him .
`` So now I think I have you safe ! ''
said Mr .
William Power to himself , stalking off with steps which made the whole gallery resound , and which made many a guilty heart tremble .
The conversation which had passed between Hardy and Mr .
Power at the head of the stairs had been anxiously listened to ; but only a word or two here and there had been distinctly overheard .
The locking of the black hole door was a terrible sound -- some knew not what it portended , and others knew TOO WELL .
All assembled in the morning with faces of anxiety .
Tarlton and Loveit 's were the most agitated : Tarlton for himself , Loveit for his friend , for himself , for everybody .
Every one of the party , and Tarlton at their head , surrounded him with reproaches ; and considered him as the author of the evils which hung over them .
`` How could you do so ?
and why did you say anything to Hardy about it ?
when you had promised , too !
Oh !
what shall we all do ?
what a scrape you have brought us into , Loveit , it 's all your fault ! ''
`` ALL MY FAULT ! ''
repeated poor Loveit , with a sigh ; `` well , that is hard . ''
`` Goodness !
there 's the bell , '' exclaimed a number of voices at once .
`` Now for it ! ''
They all stood in a half circle for morning prayers .
They listened -- '' Here he is coming !
No -- Yes -- Here he is ! ''
And Mr .
William Power , with a gloomy brow , appeared and walked up to his place at the head of the room .
They knelt down to prayers , and the moment they rose , Mr .
William Power , laying his hand upon the table , cried , `` Stand still , gentlemen , if you please . ''
Everybody stood stock still ; he walked out of the circle ; they guessed that he was gone for Hardy , and the whole room was in commotion .
Each with eagerness asked each what none could answer , '' HAS HE TOLD ? ''
`` WHAT has he told ? ''
`` Who has he told of ? ''
`` I hope he has not told of me , '' cried they .
`` I 'll answer for it he has told of all of us , '' said Tarlton .
`` And I 'll answer for it he has told of none of us , '' answered Loveit , with a sigh .
`` You do n't think he 's such a fool , when he can get himself off , '' said Tarlton .
At this instant the prisoner was led in , and as he passed through the circle , every eye was fixed upon him .
His eye fell upon no one , not even upon Loveit , who pulled him by the coat as he passed -- everyone felt almost afraid to breathe .
`` Well , sir , '' said Mr .
Power , sitting down in Mr .
Trueman 's elbow-chair , and placing the prisoner opposite to him ; `` well , sir , what have you to say to me this morning ? ''
`` Nothing , sir , '' answered Hardy , in a decided , yet modest manner ; `` nothing but what I said last night . ''
`` Nothing more ? ''
`` Nothing more , sir . ''
`` But I have something more to say to you , sir , then ; and a great deal more , I promise you , before I have done with you ; '' and then , seizing him in a fury , he was just going to give him a severe flogging , when the schoolroom door opened , and Mr .
Trueman appeared , followed by an old man whom Loveit immediately knew .
He leaned upon his stick as he walked , and in his other hand carried a basket of apples .
When they came within the circle , Mr .
Trueman stopped short .
`` Hardy ! ''
exclaimed he , with a voice of unfeigned surprise , whilst Mr .
William Power stood with his hand suspended. -- '' Ay , Hardy , sir , '' repeated he .
`` I told him you 'd not believe your own eyes . ''
Mr .
Trueman advanced with a slow step .
`` Now , sir , give me leave , '' said the usher , eagerly drawing him aside , and whispering .
`` So , sir , '' said Mr .
T. when the whisper was done , addressing himself to Hardy , with a voice and manner which , had he been guilty , must have pierced him to the heart , `` I find I have been deceived in you ; it is but three hours ago that I told your uncle I never had a boy in my school in whom I placed so much confidence ; but , after all this show of honour and integrity , the moment my back is turned , you are the first to set an example of disobedience of my orders .
Why do I talk of disobeying my commands -- you are a thief ! ''
`` I , sir ? ''
exclaimed Hardy , no longer able to repress his feelings .
`` You , sir , -- you and some others , '' said Mr .
Trueman , looking round the room with a penetrating glance -- '' you and some others . ''
`` Ay , sir , '' interrupted Mr .
William Power , `` get that out of him if you can -- ask him . ''
`` I will ask him nothing ; I shall neither put his truth nor his honour to the trial ; truth and honour are not to be expected amongst thieves . ''
`` I am not a thief !
I have never had anything to do with thieves , '' cried Hardy , indignantly .
`` Have you not robbed this old man ?
Do n't you know the taste of these apples ? ''
said Mr .
Trueman , taking one out of the basket .
`` No , sir ; I do not .
I never touched one of that old man 's apples . ''
`` Never touched one of them !
I suppose this is some vile equivocation ; you have done worse , you have had the barbarity , the baseness , to attempt to poison his dog ; the poisoned meat was found in your pocket last night . ''
`` The poisoned meat was found in my pocket , sir ; but I never intended to poison the dog -- I saved his life . ''
`` Lord bless him ! ''
said the old man .
`` Nonsense -- cunning ! ''
said Mr .
Power .
`` I hope you wo n't let him impose upon you , sir . ''
`` No , he can not impose upon me ; I have a proof he is little prepared for , '' said Mr .
Trueman , producing the blue handkerchief in which the meat had been wrapped .
Tarlton turned pale ; Hardy 's countenance never changed .
`` Do n't you know this handkerchief , sir ? ''
`` I do , sir . ''
`` Is it not yours ? ''
`` No , sir . ''
`` Do n't you know whose it is ? ''
cried Mr .
Power .
Hardy was silent .
`` Now , gentlemen , '' said Mr .
Trueman , `` I am not fond of punishing you ; but when I do it , you know , it is always in earnest .
I will begin with the eldest of you ; I will begin with Hardy , and flog you with my own hands till this handkerchief is owned . ''
`` I 'm sure it 's not mine , '' and `` I 'm sure it 's none of mine , '' burst from every mouth , whilst they looked at each other in dismay ; for none but Hardy , Loveit and Tarlton knew the secret .
`` My cane , '' said Mr .
Trueman , and Mr .
Power handed him the cane .
Loveit groaned from the bottom of his heart .
Tarlton leaned back against the wall with a black countenance .
Hardy looked with a steady eye at the cane .
`` But first , '' said Mr .
Trueman , laying down the cane , `` let us see .
Perhaps we may find out the owner of this handkerchief another way , '' examining the corners .
It was torn almost to pieces ; but luckily the corner that was marked remained .
`` J .
T. ! ''
cried Mr .
Trueman .
Every eye turned upon the guilty Tarlton , who , now as pale as ashes and trembling in every limb , sank down upon his knees , and in a whining voice begged for mercy .
`` Upon my word and honour , sir , I 'll tell you all ; I 'd never have thought of stealing the apples if Loveit had not first told me of them ; and it was Tom who first put the poisoning the dog into my head .
It was he that carried the meat , WAS N'T IT ? ''
said he , appealing to Hardy , whose word he knew must be believed .
`` Oh , dear sir ! ''
continued he as Mr .
Trueman began to move towards him , `` do let me off ; pray do let me off this time !
I 'm not the only one , indeed , sir !
I hope you wo n't make me an example for the rest .
It 's very hard I 'm to be flogged more than they ! ''
`` I 'm not going to flog you . ''
`` Thank you , sir , '' said Tarlton , getting up and wiping his eyes .
`` You need not thank me , '' said Mr .
Trueman .
`` Take your handkerchief -- go out of this room -- out of this house ; let me never see you more . ''
`` If I had any hopes of him , '' said Mr .
Trueman , as he shut the door after him ; -- '' if I had any hopes of him , I would have punished him ; -- but I have none .
Punishment is meant only to make people better ; and those who have any hopes of themselves will know how to submit to it . ''
At these words Loveit first , and immediately all the rest of the guilty party , stepped out of the ranks , confessed their fault , and declared themselves ready to bear any punishment their master thought proper .
`` Oh , they have been punished enough , '' said the old man ; `` forgive them , sir . ''
Hardy looked as if he wished to speak .
`` Not because you ask it , '' said Mr .
Trueman to the guilty penitents , `` though I should be glad to oblige you -- it would n't be just ; but there , '' pointing to Hardy , `` there is one who has merited a reward ; the highest I can give him is that of pardoning his companions . ''
Hardy bowed and his face glowed with pleasure , whilst everybody present sympathized in his feelings .
`` I am sure , '' thought Loveit , `` this is a lesson I shall never forget . ''
`` Gentlemen , '' said the old man , with a faltering voice , `` it was n't for the sake of my apples that I spoke ; and you , sir , '' said he to Hardy , `` I thank you for saving my dog .
If you please , I 'll plant on that mount , opposite the window , a young apple-tree , from my old one .
I will water it , and take care of it with my own hands for your sake , as long as I am able .
And may God bless you ! ''
laying his trembling hand on Hardy 's head ; `` may God bless you -- I 'm sure God WILL bless all such boys as you are . ''
THE BASKET-WOMAN .
`` Toute leur etude etait de se complaire et de s'entr'aider . ''
* PAUL ET VIRGINIE .
At the foot of a steep , slippery , white hill , near Dunstable , in Bedfordshire , called Chalk Hill , there is a hut , or rather a hovel , which travellers could scarcely suppose could be inhabited , if they did not see the smoke rising from its peaked roof .
An old woman lives in this hovel , * * and with her a little boy and girl , the children of a beggar who died , and left these orphans perishing with hunger .
They thought themselves very happy when the good old woman first took them into her hut and bid them warm themselves at her small fire , and gave them a crust of mouldy bread to eat .
She had not much to give , but what she had she gave with good-will .
She was very kind to these poor children , and worked hard at her spinning-wheel and at her knitting , to support herself and them .
She earned money also in another way .
She used to follow all the carriages as they went up Chalk Hill , and when the horses stopped to take breath or to rest themselves , she put stones behind the carriage wheels to prevent them from rolling backwards down the steep , slippery hill .
* `` Their whole study was how to please and to help one another . ''
* * This was about the close of the 18th century .
The little boy and girl loved to stand beside the good natured old woman 's spinning-wheel when she was spinning , and to talk to her .
At these times she taught them something , which , she said , she hoped they would remember all their lives .
She explained to them what is meant by telling the truth , and what it is to be honest .
She taught them to dislike idleness , and to wish that they could be useful .
One evening , as they were standing beside her , the little boy said to her , `` Grandmother , '' for that was the name by which she liked that these children should call her -- '' grandmother , how often you are forced to get up from your spinning-wheel , and to follow the chaises and coaches up that steep hill , to put stones underneath the wheels , to hinder them from rolling back !
The people who are in the carriages give you a halfpenny or a penny for doing this , do n't they ? ''
`` Yes , child . ''
`` But it is very hard work for you to go up and down that hill .
You often say that you are tired , and then you know that you can not spin all that time .
Now if we might go up the hill , and put the stones behind the wheels , you could sit still at your work , and would not the people give us the halfpence ?
and could not we bring them all to you ?
Do , pray , dear grandmother , try us for one day -- to-morrow , will you ? ''
`` Yes , '' said the old woman ; `` I will try what you can do ; but I must go up the hill along with you for the first two or three times , for fear you should get yourselves hurt . ''
So , the next day , the little boy and girl went with their grandmother , as they used to call her , up the steep hill ; and she showed the boy how to prevent the wheels from rolling back , by putting stones behind them ; and she said , `` This is called scotching the wheels ; '' and she took off the boy 's hat and gave it to the little girl , to hold up to the carriage- windows , ready for the halfpence .
When she thought that the children knew how to manage by themselves , she left them , and returned to her spinning-wheel .
A great many carriages happened to go by this day , and the little girl received a great many halfpence .
She carried them all in her brother 's hat to her grandmother in the evening ; and the old woman smiled , and thanked the children .
She said that they had been useful to her , and that her spinning had gone on finely , because she had been able to sit still at her wheel all day .
`` But , Paul my boy , '' said she , `` what is the matter with your hand ? ''
`` Only a pinch -- only one pinch that I got , as I was putting a stone behind a wheel of a chaise .
It does not hurt me much , grandmother ; and I've thought of a good thing for to-morrow .
I shall never be hurt again , if you will only be so good as to give me the old handle of the broken crutch , grandmother , and the block of wood that lies in the chimney- corner , and that is of no use .
I 'll make it of some use , if I may have it . ''
`` Take it then , dear , '' said the old woman ; `` and you 'll find the handle of the broken crutch under my bed . ''
Paul went to work immediately , and fastened one end of the pole into the block of wood , so as to make something like a dry-rubbing brush .
`` Look , grandmamma , look at my SCOTCHER .
I call this thing my SCOTCHER , '' said Paul , `` because I shall always scotch the wheels with it .
I shall never pinch my fingers again ; my hands , you see , will be safe at the end of this long stick ; and , sister Anne , you need not be at the trouble of carrying any more stones after me up the hill ; we shall never want stones any more .
My scotcher will do without anything else , I hope .
I wish it was morning , and that a carriage would come , that I might run up the hill , and try my scotcher . ''
`` And I wish that as many chaises may go by to-morrow as there did to-day , and that we may bring you as many halfpence , grandmother , '' said the little girl .
`` So do I , my dear Anne , '' said the old woman ; `` for I mean that you and your brother shall have all the money that you get to-morrow .
You may buy some gingerbread for yourselves , or some of those ripe plums that you saw at the fruit-stall the other day , which is just going into Dunstable .
I told you then that I could not afford to buy such things for you ; but now that you can earn halfpence for yourselves , children , it is fair should taste a ripe plum and bit of gingerbread for once and a way in your lives . ''
`` We 'll bring some of the gingerbread home to her , sha n't we , brother ? ''
whispered little Anne .
The morning came ; but no carriages were heard , though Paul and his sister had risen at five o'clock , that they might be sure to be ready for early travellers .
Paul kept his scotcher poised upon his shoulder , and watched eagerly at his station at the bottom of the hill .
He did not wait long before a carriage came .
He followed it up the hill ; and the instant the postillion called to him , and bid him stop the wheels , he put his scotcher behind them , and found that it answered the purpose perfectly well .
Many carriages went by this day , and Paul and Anne received a great many halfpence from the travellers .
When it grew dusk in the evening , Anne said to her brother -- '' I don't think any more carriages will come by to-day .
Let us count the halfpence , and carry them home now to grandmother . ''
`` No , not yet , '' answered Paul , `` let them alone -- let them lie still in the hole where I have put them .
I daresay more carriages will come by before it is quite dark , and then we shall have more halfpence . ''
Paul had taken the halfpence out of his hat , and he had put them into a hole in the high bank by the roadside ; and Anne said she would not meddle with them , and that she would wait till her brother liked to count them ; and Paul said -- '' If you will stay and watch here , I will go and gather some blackberries for you in the hedge in yonder field .
Stand you hereabouts , half-way up the hill , and the moment you see any carriage coming along the road , run as fast as you can and call me . ''
Anne waited a long time , or what she thought a long time ; and she saw no carriage , and she trailed her brother 's scotcher up and down till she was tired .
Then she stood still , and looked again , and she saw no carriage ; so she went sorrowfully into the field , and to the hedge where her brother was gathering blackberries , and she said , `` Paul , I 'm sadly tired , SADLY TIRED ! ''
said she , `` and my eyes are quite strained with looking for chaises ; no more chaises will come to-night ; and your scotcher is lying there , of no use , upon the ground .
Have not I waited long enough for to- day , Paul ? ''
`` Oh , no , '' said Paul ; `` here are some blackberries for you ; you had better wait a little bit longer .
Perhaps a carriage might go by whilst you are standing here talking to me . ''
Anne , who was of a very obliging temper , and who liked to do what she was asked to do , went back to the place where the scotcher lay ; and scarcely had she reached the spot , when she heard the noise of a carriage .
She ran to call her brother , and to their great joy , they now saw four chaises coming towards them .
Paul , as soon as they went up the hill , followed with his scotcher ; first he scotched the wheels of one carriage , then of another ; and Anne was so much delighted with observing how well the scotcher stopped the wheels , and how much better it was than stones , that she forgot to go and hold her brother 's hat to the travellers for halfpence , till she was roused by the voice of a little rosy girl , who was looking out of the window of one of the chaises .
`` Come close to the chaise-door , '' said the little girl ; `` here are some halfpence for you . ''
Anne held the hat ; and she afterwards went on to the other carriages .
Money was thrown to her from each of them ; and when they had all gotten safely to the top of the hill , she and her brother sat down upon a large stone by the roadside , to count their treasure .
First they began by counting what was in the hat -- '' One , two , three , four halfpence . ''
`` But , oh , brother , look at this ! ''
exclaimed Anne ; `` this is not the same as the other halfpence . ''
`` No , indeed , it is not , '' cried Paul , `` it is no halfpenny ; it is a guinea , a bright golden guinea ! ''
`` Is it ? ''
said Anne , who had never seen a guinea in her life before , and who did not know its value ; `` and will it do as well as a halfpenny to buy gingerbread ?
I 'll run to the fruit-stall , and ask the woman ; shall I ? ''
`` No , no , '' said Paul , `` you need not ask any woman , or anybody but me ; I can tell you all about it , as well as anybody in the whole world . ''
`` The whole world !
Oh , Paul , you forgot .
Not so well as my grandmother . ''
`` Why , not so well as my grandmother , perhaps , but , Anne , I can tell you that you must not talk yourself , Anne , but you must listen to me quietly , or else you wo n't understand what I am going to tell you , for I can assure you that I do n't think I quite understood it myself , Anne , the first time my grandmother told it to me , though I stood stock still listening my best . ''
Prepared by this speech to hear something very difficult to be understood , Anne looked very grave , and her brother explained to her , that , with a guinea , she might buy two hundred and fifty-two times as many plums as she could get for a penny .
`` Why , Paul , you know the fruit-woman said she would give us a dozen plums for a penny .
Now , for this little guinea , would she give us two hundred and fifty-two dozen ? ''
`` If she has so many , and if we like to have so many , to be sure she will , '' said Paul , `` but I think we should not like to have two hundred and fifty-two dozen of plums ; we could not eat such a number . ''
`` But we could give some of them to my grandmother , '' said Anne .
`` But still there would be too many for her , and for us , too , '' said Paul , '' and when we had eaten the plums , there would be an end to all the pleasure .
But now I 'll tell you what I am thinking of , Anne , that we might buy something for my grandmother , that would be very useful to her indeed , with the guinea -- something that would last a great while . ''
`` What , brother ?
What sort of thing ? ''
`` Something that she said she wanted very much last winter , when she was so ill with the rheumatism -- something that she said yesterday , when you were making her bed , she wished she might be able to buy before next winter . ''
`` I know , I know what you mean ! ''
said Anne -- '' a blanket .
Oh , yes , Paul , that will be much better than plums ; do let us buy a blanket for her ; how glad she will be to see it !
I will make her bed with the new blanket , and then bring her to see it .
But , Paul , how shall we buy a blanket ?
Where are blankets to be got ? ''
`` Leave that to me , I 'll manage that .
I know where blankets can be got .
I saw one hanging out of a shop the day I went last to Dunstable . ''
`` You have seen a great many things at Dunstable , brother . ''
`` Yes , a great many ; but I never saw anything there or anywhere else , that I wished for half so much as I did for the blanket for my grandmother .
Do you remember how she used to shiver with the cold last winter ?
I'll buy the blanket to-morrow .
I 'm going to Dunstable with her spinning . ''
`` And you 'll bring the blanket to me , and I shall make the bed very neatly , that will be all right -- all happy ! ''
said Anne , clapping her hands .
`` But stay !
Hush !
do n't clap your hands so , Anne ; it will not be all happy , I 'm afraid , '' said Paul , and his countenance changed , and he looked very grave .
`` It will not be all right , I 'm afraid , for there is one thing we have neither of us thought of , but that we ought to think about .
We can not buy the blanket , I 'm afraid . ''
`` Why , Paul , why ? ''
`` Because I do n't think this guinea is honestly ours . ''
`` Nay , brother , but I 'm sure it is honestly ours .
It was given to us , and grandmother said all that was given to us to-day was to be our own . ''
`` But who gave it to you , Anne ? ''
`` Some of the people in those chaises , Paul .
I do n't know which of them , but I daresay it was the little rosy girl . ''
`` No , '' said Paul , `` for when she called you to the chaise door , she said , 'Here 's some halfpence for you . '
Now , if she gave you the guinea , she must have given it to you by mistake . ''
`` Well , but perhaps some of the people in the other chaises gave it to me , and did not give it to me by mistake , Paul .
There was a gentleman reading in one of the chaises and a lady , who looked very good-naturedly at me , and then the gentleman put down his book and put his head out of the window , and looked at your scotcher , brother , and he asked me if that was your own making ; and when I said yes , and that I was your sister he smiled at me , and put his hand into his waistcoat pocket , and threw a handful of halfpence into the hat , and I daresay he gave us the guinea along with them because he liked your scotcher so much . ''
`` Why , '' said Paul , `` that might be , to be sure , but I wish I was quite certain of it . ''
`` Then , as we are not quite certain , had not we best go and ask my grandmother what she thinks about it ? ''
Paul thought this was excellent advice ; and he was not a silly boy , who did not like to follow good advice .
He went with his sister directly to his grandmother , showed her the guinea , and told her how they came by it .
`` My dear , honest children , '' said she , `` I am very glad you told me all this .
I am very glad that you did not buy either the plums or the blanket with this guinea .
I 'm sure it is not honestly ours .
Those who threw it you gave it you by mistake , I warrant ; and what I would have you do is , to go to Dunstable , and try if you can , at either of the inns find out the person who gave it to you .
It is now so late in the evening that perhaps the travellers will sleep at Dunstable , instead of going on the next stage ; and it is likely that whosoever gave you a guinea instead of a halfpenny has found out their mistake by this time .
All you can do is to go and inquire for the gentleman who was reading in the chaise . ''
`` Oh ! ''
interrupted Paul , `` I know a good way of finding him out .
I remember it was a dark green chaise with red wheels : and I remember I read the innkeeper 's name upon the chaise , 'John Nelson . '
( I am much obliged to you for teaching me to read , grandmother . )
You told me yesterday , grandmother , that the names written upon chaises are the innkeepers to whom they belong .
I read the name of the innkeeper upon that chaise .
It was John Nelson .
So Anne and I will go to both the inns in Dunstable , and try to find out this chaise -- John Nelson 's .
Come , Anne ; let us set out before it gets quite dark . ''
Anne and her brother passed with great courage the tempting stall that was covered with gingerbread and ripe plums , and pursued their way steadily through the streets of Dunstable ; but Paul , when he came to the shop where he had seen the blanket , stopped for a moment , and said , `` It is a great pity , Anne , that the guinea is not ours .
However , we are doing what is honest , and that is a comfort .
Here , we must go through this gateway , into the inn-yard ; we are come to the 'Dun Cow . ' ''
`` Cow ! ''
said Anne , `` I see no cow . ''
`` Look up , and you 'll see the cow over your head , '' said Paul -- '' the sign -- the picture .
Come , never mind looking at it now ; I want to find out the green chaise that has John Nelson 's name upon it . ''
Paul pushed forward , through a crowded passage , till he got into the inn- yard .
There was a great noise and bustle .
The hostlers were carrying in luggage .
The postillions were rubbing down the horses , or rolling the chaises into the coach-house .
`` What now !
What business have you here , pray ? ''
said a waiter , who almost ran over Paul , as he was crossing the yard in a great hurry to get some empty bottles from the bottle-rack .
`` You 've no business here , crowding up the yard .
Walk off , young gentleman , if you please . ''
`` Pray give me leave , sir , '' said Paul , `` to stay a few minutes , to look amongst these chaises for one dark green chaise with red wheels , that has Mr .
John Nelson 's name written upon it . ''
`` What 's that he says about a dark green chaise ? ''
said one of the postillions .
`` What should such a one as he is know about chaises ? ''
interrupted the hasty waiter , and he vas going to turn Paul out of the yard ; but the hostler caught hold of his arm and said , `` Maybe the child has some business here ; let 's know what he has to say for himself . ''
The waiter was at this instant luckily obliged to leave them to attend the bell ; and Paul told his business to the hostler , who as soon as he saw the guinea and heard the story , shook Paul by the hand , and said , '' Stand steady , my honest lad ; I 'll find the chaise for you , if it is to be found here ; but John Nelson 's chaises almost always drive to the 'Black Bull . ' ''
After some difficulty , the green chaise , with John Nelson 's name upon it , and the postillion who drove that chaise , were found ; and the postillion told Paul that he was just going into the parlour to the gentleman he had driven , to be paid , and that he would carry the guinea with him .
`` No , '' said Paul , `` we should like to give it back ourselves . ''
`` Yes , '' said the hostler ; `` that they have a right to do . ''
The postillion made no reply , but looked vexed , and went towards the house , desiring the children would wait in the passage till his return .
In the passage there was standing a decent , clean , good natured looking woman , with two huge straw baskets on each side of her .
One of the baskets stood a little in the way of the entrance .
A man who was pushing his way in , and carried in his hand a string of dead larks hung to a pole , impatient at being stopped , kicked down the straw basket , and all its contents were thrown out .
Bright straw hats , and boxes , and slippers , were all thrown in disorder upon the dirty ground .
`` Oh , they will be trampled upon !
They will be all spoiled ! ''
exclaimed the woman to whom they belonged .
`` We 'll help you to pick them up if you will let us , '' cried Paul and Anne ; and they immediately ran to her assistance .
When the things were all safe in the basket again , the children expressed a desire to know how such beautiful things could be made of straw ; but the woman had not time to answer before the postillion came out of the parlour , and with him a gentleman 's servant , who came to Paul , and clapping him upon the back , said , `` So , my little chap , I gave you a guinea for a halfpenny , I hear ; and I understand you 've brought it back again ; that 's right , give me hold of it . ''
`` No , brother , '' said Anne , `` this is not the gentleman that was reading . ''
`` Pooh , child , I came in Mr .
Nelson 's green chaise .
Here 's the postillion can tell you so .
I and my master came in that chaise .
I and my master that was reading , as you say , and it was he that threw the money out to you .
He is going to bed ; he is tired and ca n't see you himself .
He desires that you 'll give me the guinea . ''
He pushed them towards the door ; but the basket-woman whispered to them as they went out , `` Wait in the street till I come to you . ''
`` Pray , Mrs .
Landlady , '' cried this gentleman 's servant , addressing himself to the landlady , who just then came out of a room where some company were at supper , `` Pray , Mrs .
Landlady , please to let me have roasted larks for my supper .
You are famous for larks at Dunstable ; and I make it a rule to taste the best of everything wherever I go ; and , waiter , let me have a bottle of claret .
Do you hear ? ''
`` Larks and claret for his supper , '' said the basket-woman to herself , as she looked at him from head to foot .
The postillion was still waiting , as if to speak to him ; and she observed them afterwards whispering and laughing together .
`` NO BAD HIT , '' was a sentence which the servant pronounced several times .
Now it occurred to the basket-woman that this man had cheated the children out of the guinea to pay for the larks and claret ; and she thought that perhaps she could discover the truth .
She waited quietly in the passage .
`` Waiter !
Joe !
Joe ! ''
cried the landlady , `` why do n't you carry in the sweetmeat-puffs and the tarts here to the company in the best parlour ? ''
`` Coming , ma'am , '' answered the waiter ; and with a large dish of tarts and puffs , the waiter came from the bar ; the landlady threw open the door of the best parlour , to let him in ; and the basket-woman had now a full view of a large cheerful company , and amongst them several children , sitting round a supper-table .
`` Ay , '' whispered the landlady , as the door closed after the waiter and the tarts , `` there are customers enough , I warrant , for you in that room , if you had but the luck to be called in .
Pray , what would you have the conscience , I wonder now , to charge me for these here half-dozen little mats to put under my dishes ? ''
`` A trifle , ma'am , '' said the basket-woman .
She let the landlady have the mats cheap , and the landlady then declared she would step in and see if the company in the best parlour had done supper .
`` When they come to their wine , '' added she , `` I 'll speak a good word for you , and get you called in afore the children are sent to bed . ''
The landlady , after the usual speech of , `` I hope the supper and everything is to your liking , ladies and gentlemen , '' began with , `` If any of the young gentlemen or ladies would have a CUR'OSITY to see any of our famous Dunstable straw-work , there 's a decent body without would , I daresay , be proud to show them her pincushion-boxes , and her baskets and slippers , and her other CUR'OSITIES . ''
The eyes of the children all turned towards their mother ; their mother smiled , and immediately their father called in the basket-woman , and desired her to produce her CURIOSITIES .
The children gathered round her large pannier as it opened , but they did not touch any of her things .
`` Ah , papa ! ''
cried a little rosy girl , `` here are a pair of straw slippers that would just fit you , I think ; but would not straw shoes wear out very soon ?
and would not they let in the wet ? ''
`` Yes , my dear , '' said her father , `` but these slippers are meant -- '' '' For powdering-slippers , miss , '' interrupted the basket-woman .
`` To wear when people are powdering their hair , '' continued the gentleman , '' that they may not spoil their other shoes . ''
`` And will you buy them , papa ? ''
`` No , I can not indulge myself , '' said her father , `` in buying them now .
I must make amends , '' said he , laughing , `` for my carelessness ; and as I threw away a guinea to-day , I must endeavour to save sixpence at least ? ''
`` Ah , the guinea that you threw by mistake into the little girl 's hat as we were coming up Chalk Hill .
Mamma , I wonder that the little girl did not take notice of its being a guinea , and that she did not run after the chaise to give it back again .
I should think , if she had been an honest girl , she would have returned it . ''
`` Miss ! -- ma'am ! -- sir ! ''
said the basket-woman , `` if it would not be impertinent , may I speak a word ?
A little boy and girl have just been here inquiring for a gentleman who gave them a guinea instead of a halfpenny by mistake ; and not five minutes ago I saw the boy give the guinea to a gentleman 's servant , who is there without , and who said his master desired it should be returned to him . ''
`` There must be some mistake , or some trick in this , '' said the gentleman .
`` Are the children gone ?
I must see them -- send after them . ''
`` I 'll go for them myself , '' said the good natured basket-woman ; `` I bid them wait in the street yonder , for my mind misgave me that the man who spoke so short to them was a cheat , with his larks and his claret . ''
Paul and Anne were speedily summoned , and brought back by their friend the basket-woman ; and Anne , the moment she saw the gentleman , knew that he was the very person who smiled upon her , who admired her brother's scotcher , and who threw a handful of halfpence into the hat ; but she could not be certain , she said , that she received the guinea from him ; she only thought it most likely that she did .
`` But I can be certain whether the guinea you returned be mine or no , '' said the gentleman .
`` I marked the guinea ; it was a light one ; the only guinea I had , which I put into my waistcoat pocket this morning . ''
He rang the bell , and desired the waiter to let the gentleman who was in the room opposite to him know that he wished to see him .
`` The gentleman in the white parlour , sir , do you mean ? ''
`` I mean the master of the servant who received a guinea from this child . ''
`` He is a Mr .
Pembroke , sir , '' said the waiter .
Mr .
Pembroke came ; and as soon as he heard what had happened , he desired the waiter to show him to the room where his servant was at supper .
The dishonest servant , who was supping upon larks and claret , knew nothing of what was going on ; but his knife and fork dropped from his hand , and he overturned a bumper of claret as he started up from the table , in great surprise and terror , when his master came in with a face of indignation , and demanded `` THE GUINEA -- the GUINEA , sir !
that you got from this child ; that guinea which you said I ordered you to ask for from this child . ''
The servant , confounded and half intoxicated , could only stammer out that he had more guineas than one about him , and that he really did not know which it was .
He pulled his money out , and spread it upon the table with trembling hands .
The marked guinea appeared .
His master instantly turned him out of his service with strong expressions of contempt .
`` And now , my little honest girl , '' said the gentleman who had admired her brother 's scotcher , turning to Anne , `` and now tell me who you are , and what you and your brother want or wish for most in the world . ''
In the same moment Anne and Paul exclaimed , `` The thing we wish for the most in the world is a blanket for our grandmother . ''
`` She is not our grandmother in reality , I believe , sir , '' said Paul ; `` but she is just as good to us , and taught me to read , and taught Anne to knit , and taught us both that we should be honest -- so she has ; and I wish she had a new blanket before next winter , to keep her from the cold and the rheumatism .
She had the rheumatism sadly last winter , sir ; and there is a blanket in this street that would be just the thing for her . ''
`` She shall have it , then ; and , '' continued the gentleman , `` I will do something more for you .
Do you like to be employed or to be idle best ? ''
`` We like to have something to do always , if we could , sir , '' said Paul ; '' but we are forced to be idle sometimes , because grandmother has not always things for us to do that we CAN do well . ''
`` Should you like to learn how to make such baskets as these ? ''
said the gentleman , pointing to one of the Dunstable straw-baskets .
`` Oh , very much ! ''
said Paul .
`` Very much ! ''
said Anne .
`` Then I should like to teach you how to make them , '' said the basket- woman ; `` for I 'm sure of one thing , that you 'd behave honestly to me . ''
The gentleman put a guinea into the good natured basket-woman 's hand , and told her that he knew she could not afford to teach them her trade for nothing .
`` I shall come through Dunstable again in a few months , '' added he ; `` and I hope to see that you and your scholars are going on well .
If I find that they are , I will do something more for you . ''
`` But , '' said Anne , `` we must tell all this to grandmother , and ask her about it ; and I 'm afraid -- though I 'm very happy -- that it is getting very late , and that we should not stay here any longer . ''
`` It is a fine moonlight night , '' said the basket-woman ; `` and is not far .
I 'll walk with you , and see you safe home myself . ''
The gentleman detained them a few minutes longer , till a messenger whom he had dispatched to purchase the much wished for blanket returned .
`` Your grandmother will sleep well upon this good blanket , I hope , '' said the gentleman , as he gave it into Paul 's opened arms .
`` It has been obtained for her by the honesty of her adopted children . ''

